Reference Materials
Skip to page navigation
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government
organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
secure websites.
Menu
Search all of OPM
Submit
Sections
About
Toggle submenu
Our Agency
Who We Are
Our Work
Mission & History
Careers at OPM
Doing Business with OPM
Reports & Publications
Open Government
Get Help
Contact Us
News
Data
2023 Agency Financial Report
Combined Federal Campaign
2023 Annual Performance Report
FY 2025 Congressional Budget Justification
2024 Agency Financial Report
2024 Agency Financial Report
2024 Annual Performance Report
FY 2026 Congressional Budget Justification
Fork
HR Career Compass
Executive Summary
Organizational Framework
Revolving Funds Activities
Earned Benefits Trust Funds
Office of the Inspector General
Appendix: GAO-IG Act Reporting for Budget Fiscal Year 2026
List of Acronyms
Office of Equal Employment Opportunity
Policy
Toggle submenu
CHCO Council
Reductions in Force
Assessment & Selection
Classification & Qualifications
Data, Analysis & Documentation
Disability Employment
Employee Relations
Enterprise Risk Management Program
Hiring Information
Human Capital Management
Human Capital Framework
Labor Management Relations
Oversight and Effectiveness
Pandemic Information
Pay & Leave
Performance Management
Senior Executive Service
Settlement Guidelines
Snow & Dismissal Procedures
Training & Development
Tribal Consultation
Veterans Services
Work-Life
Workforce Restructuring
Policy FAQs
Contact Policymakers
Career Paths for Federal Program and Project Management Guide
Federal Hiring and Selection Outcome Dashboard
Compliance
Toggle submenu
Adjudications
Insurance
Toggle submenu
Open Season
Healthcare
FEHB Plan Comparison Tool
Tribal Employers
Postal Service Health Benefits Program
Medicare
Dental & Vision
FEDVIP Plan Comparison Tool
Carriers
Flexible Spending Accounts
Life Insurance
Long Term Care
Insurance Glossary
Insurance FAQs
Contact Healthcare & Insurance
Special Initiatives
Changes in Health Coverage
Issuer
Life Events
The Affordable Care Act
Retirement
Toggle submenu
Apply for Retirement
My Annuity and Benefits
CSRS Information
FERS Information
Phased Retirement
Retirement Statistics
Special Notices
Calculators
Tax Information for Annuitants
Publications & Forms
Benefits Officers Center
Retirement FAQs
Survivor Benefits
How to Make a Payment
Contact Retirement
Retirement Information Center
Suitability
Toggle submenu
Suitability Executive Agent
Position Designation Tool
Suitability Adjudications
Suitability Training
Oversight
Policy
Frequently Asked Questions
Contact SuitEA
Agency Services
Toggle submenu
Talent Management Services
Talent Systems
Training and Development
HR Governance
Workforce Data
Contact
News
Toggle submenu
Secrets of OPM
From the Director’s Desk
News Releases
In this section
Facebook
Twitter
A–Z Index
Contact Us
Forms
FAQs
Operating Status:
Loading
Search for
U.S. Office of Personnel Management
About
Open "About" Submenu
Close Menu
Policy
Open "Policy" Submenu
Close Menu
Compliance
Open "Compliance" Submenu
Close Menu
Insurance
Open "Insurance" Submenu
Close Menu
Retirement
Open "Retirement" Submenu
Close Menu
Suitability
Open "Suitability" Submenu
Close Menu
Agency Services
Open "Agency Services" Submenu
Close Menu
News
Open "News" Submenu
Close Menu
☰
About
Open "About" Submenu
Close Menu
Policy
Open "Policy" Submenu
Close Menu
Compliance
Open "Compliance" Submenu
Close Menu
Insurance
Open "Insurance" Submenu
Close Menu
Retirement
Open "Retirement" Submenu
Close Menu
Suitability
Open "Suitability" Submenu
Close Menu
Agency Services
Open "Agency Services" Submenu
Close Menu
News
Open "News" Submenu
Close Menu
OPM.gov
/
Skip to main content
In this section
Resources For
New / Prospective Employees
Federal Employees
HR Professionals
Managers
Reference Materials
Performance Management History
This document summarizes the key factors that have helped set the stage for the current performance management approaches.
The Centralized Federal Performance Management System
The Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 brought performance appraisal to the center of many aspects of personnel management. The Governmentwide system was standardized in the mid-1980's to use five rating levels and establish strict links between ratings and related personnel actions such as cash awards. Over the years, dissatisfaction with this one-size-fits-all approach increased. Rating inflation grew steadily and the entire system lost its credibility for all its stakeholders.
Previous Studies on Performance Appraisal
Several committees studied and recommended changes for the Federal performance appraisal system. In 1990, the Committee on Performance Appraisal for Merit Pay, a National Research Council committee established at OPM's request, reviewed current research on performance appraisal and merit pay and supplemented the research findings with an examination of the practices of private sector employers. In 1991, the Pay-for-Performance Labor-Management Committee examined ways to strengthen the linkage between the performance of Federal employees and their pay. Also that year, the Performance Management and Recognition System (PMRS) Review Committee was established to review and recommend improvements to the PMRS system of merit pay for the Government's mid-level managers. All three committees concluded that an appraisal approach must be flexible and decentralized so that it would be able to fit its context of both work technology and organization culture. Consensus was also clear about the value of involving employees in the design and implementation of appraisal and awards systems for increasing credibility and acceptance.
Additional Recommendations for Change
In its initial report,
From Red Tape to Results
(1993), the National Performance Review recommended a decentralized approach to performance management that would encourage employee involvement in system design, focus on improving performance, and maintain individual accountability. In its more detailed accompanying report,
Reinventing Human Resource Management
(1993), the NPR was more specific, proposing that decentralized systems should be developed by managers and employees and their representatives; policies should be revised to support team structures; and pass/fail appraisal should be possible. The National Partnership Council also supported the NPR recommendations and noted the shared interest of both labor and management to foster high-performance organizations. The President's Management Council called for more flexibility and decentralization, while emphasizing using appraisal to establish and maintain individual accountability.
Stakeholder Interests
Many stakeholders had voiced concerns about the Federal performance management system as it operated prior to the 1995 regulations. Employees were dissatisfied with the old system; it was the single greatest source of grievances. Unions expected change to the system based on the recommendations in the Pay-for-Performance Labor-Management Committee report. Management associations expected change based on the recommendations in the PMRS Review Committee report. Taxpayers wanted to see pay-for-performance and individual performance accountability systems for Federal employees in part because many believe that service is poor, that mediocre performance is tolerated, and that pay raises are automatic. Federal managers had been demanding change and expressing growing frustration with the system that did little to add value or help them actually manage performance. And Congress had expressed the strong need to maintain individual accountability through the appraisal process and to ensure that rewards are allocated appropriately and can be justified.
Conflicting Purposes
A principal source of these problems and stakeholders' concerns lay in the underlying conflict between two purposes system designers intended for the performance management procedures and requirements. First, performance appraisal was to be the means of establishing and maintaining individual accountability and the basis for making decisions about rewards and sanctions. But it was also supposed to lead to improved employee and agency performance. Experience has demonstrated that the hard links between ratings and rewards have led inexorably to inflated ratings against standards that do not serve as effective performance targets and stretch goals. While the private sector has not solved the problems this dual use of performance management systems can produce, it does appear that organizational commitment to the performance management system reduces the problems that occur when the summary appraisal is the focus of the system. When the emphasis is on managing—rather than primarily judging—performance, frequent feedback to performers allows for correction of performance deficiencies before the summary appraisal is made.
Credibility Requires Improved Measurement
As important as achieving a more effective balance between the reward allocation and performance improvement purposes of performance appraisal may be, the real key to increasing the credibility and utility of performance management processes lies in improving the performance measures that are used. Emphasizing individual accountability led to agencies establishing performance elements and standards that extracted process-input tasks and responsibilities from position descriptions. Although they were appropriate and usable for sustaining performance-based adverse actions before the Merit Systems Protection Board, such elements and standards often did not lend themselves to results measurement or goal setting. Also, although measuring individual outputs and results is usually possible, it may not be cost effective compared to the performance management value of measuring group or team outputs and results.
Governmentwide Performance Initiatives That Link to Performance Management
Fortunately, several Governmentwide initiatives are leading agencies to reexamine and improve their performance measures. The 1995 performance management regulations are primed to use those measures for managing and rewarding employees. Key performance initiatives require agencies to set goals and standards and to measure their performance in terms of results. When employee and group performance plans are aligned with these agency goals, everyone's efforts are focused on goal achievement and improving organizational performance. Setting goals and measuring performance are part of an effective performance management process. The Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 (GPRA) provides for the establishment of strategic planning and performance measurement in the Federal Government. It requires agencies to develop strategic plans and performance plans for program activities. Those performance plans establish objective, quantifiable, and measurable goals; establish performance indicators; and provide a basis for comparing program results with plan goals. And on September 7, 1993, the President issued Executive Order 12862, "Setting Customer Service Standards," which requires agencies to identify and survey their customers; post customer service standards and measure results against them; and publish a customer service plan that includes customer service standards and describes future plans for customer surveys.
Back to Top
Historical Chronology
A chronology of the major milestones in the evolution of employee performance management in the Federal Government is presented below.
Chronology of Employee Performance Management in the Federal Government
Year
Actions
2016
Introduced Performance Management Plus
Transitioned the work of the GEAR model to a “Performance Management Plus” philosophy – where the “Plus” is employee
engagement
Emphasized that agencies need to do more than simply perform the mechanical steps of performance management in compliance with law and regulations
Encouraged agencies to empower and hold supervisors accountable for engaging their employees early and frequently throughout the performance period to drive accountability and to enable success
2015
Introduced the Recruitment, Engagement, Diversity, and Inclusion (REDI) Roadmap
Focused on Engagement aspect of GEAR in addition to improving hiring initiatives
Provided agencies a roadmap to a skilled Federal workforce that is engaged, inclusive, and drawn from all segments of society
Provided a data-driven, forward-looking human capital management strategy to help the Federal Government attract, develop, and retain a talented, engaged, and diverse workforce
Supported agencies in measuring engagement through the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey and by focusing on such drivers as leadership, inclusion, and supervision
Revised Senior Executive Service appraisal regulations
Provided a common framework and performance standards for agencies to use in designing their SES performance management systems
Required agencies to use critical elements based on OPM-validated executive competencies to evaluate executive leadership and results
Required agencies to establish five summary performance levels and derive an annual summary rating through a mathematical method
Streamlined the Senior Executive Service (SES) performance appraisal system certification process
Provided greater opportunity for agencies to partner with OPM and share responsibility for reviewing certification criteria
2014
Issued final SL/ST pay regulations
Established rules for setting and adjusting SL/ST pay on the basis of the employee’s performance and/or contribution to the agency’s performance, as determined under a rigorous performance appraisal system
2012
Established a model SES performance appraisal system
Provided a more consistent and uniform framework to communicate expectations and evaluate the performance of SES members
Focused on the role of and responsibility of SES members to achieve results through effective executive leadership with five performance elements based on the five Executive Core Qualifications (ECQ)
Enhanced clarity, transferability, and equity in the development of performance requirements, the delivery of feedback, the derivation of ratings, and the link to compensation
2011
Established Goals-Engagement-Accountability-Results (GEAR) Model
Designed to help agencies create high-performing organizations that are aligned, accountable, and focused on results
Recommended that agencies articulate a high-performance culture; align employee performance management with organizational performance management; implement accountability at all levels; create a culture of engagement; and improve the assessment, selection, development and training of supervisors
Piloted at five CHCO agencies
2009
Revised regulations on training and development of supervisors
Required agencies to provide each supervisor and manager training on the use of appropriate actions, options, and strategies to mentor employees, improve employee performance and productivity, conduct employee performance appraisals in accordance with agency appraisal systems; and identify and assist employees with unacceptable performance
2008
Senior Professional Performance Act
Established access to higher pay for employees in SL/ST positions
Authorized agencies with SL/ST certified performance appraisal system(s) to set higher pay (up to level II of the Executive Schedule)
Removed locality pay adjustments
Authorized certifications up to 24 months with a possible 6 month extension for SES and SL/ST appraisal systems
Inspector General Reform Act of 2008
Prohibited an Inspector General from receiving any cash award or cash bonus
Required each Office of Inspector General (OIG) be treated as a separate agency for provisions relating to SES
Resulted in establishment of OIG SES appraisal systems separate from the agency SES system
Resulted in OPM approval and certification of those systems
2007
Established Performance Appraisal Assessment Tool (PAAT) for SES and SL/ST appraisal systems for determining certification
Designed as an agency self-assessment tool for evaluating SES and SL/ST appraisal systems against certification criteria
2006
Established Performance Appraisal Assessment Tool (PAAT) for non-SES employees
Designed to help agencies evaluate performance appraisal programs, identify strengths and weaknesses, and develop plans for making improvements to programs
Revised awards regulations on performance-based awards
Codified statutory threshold for performance-based cash awards (i.e., performance-based awards must be based on a rating of record of Fully Successful or higher)
Required agencies to ensure that performance-based awards reflect meaningful distinctions based on levels of performance
2005
Revised awards regulations on calculating the payment of performance-based awards
Required agencies granting performance-based cash award as a percentage of basic pay to include locality payments and special rate supplements in computing the awards
2004
Issued interim regulations for Certification of Performance Appraisal Systems
Established criteria and procedural requirements for the certification of SES and SL/ST performance appraisal systems
Required agencies to submit evidence they have designed, implemented, and applied appraisal systems that make meaningful distinctions in performance and pay
Issued final Senior Executive Service pay regulations
Established rules for setting and adjusting SES pay on the basis of the employee’s performance and/or contribution to the agency’s performance
Revised rules for paying performance awards and applying the aggregate limitation on pay
Revised regulations on performance-based awards to non-GS employees
Permitted agencies to grant performance-based cash awards to non-GS employees covered by 5 U.S.C. chapter 45 who are not covered by an explicit statutory authority to pay such awards
2003
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004
Established Human Capital Performance Fund to pay top-performing employees
Not implemented due to lack of funding
Provided agencies with additional resources to grant pay increases to their highest performing employees
Provided authority for the Department of Defense to design its own human resources systems, including a pay-for-performance system
Established a pay-for-performance system for members of the Senior Executive Service
Replaced a six-level pay system with a single, open-range payband
Removed annual across-the-board and locality pay adjustments and required pay adjustments based on performance
Authorized agencies with certified performance appraisal system(s) to set higher pay (up to level II of the Executive Schedule)
2002
Chief Human Capital Officers Act
Established certification of performance appraisal systems for employees in senior-level (SL) and scientific or professional (ST) positions and SES members
Required agencies to design and implement performance appraisal systems that make meaningful distinctions in performance for SES and SL/ST employees for appraisal systems to be certified
Required agencies to obtain certification of performance appraisal systems from OPM, with the concurrence of the Office of Management and Budget, before applying a higher aggregate pay limitation, up to the Vice President’s salary
Required the establishment of systems, standards, and metrics for assessing agencies’ management of human capital
Required OPM to set standards for sustaining a culture that cultivates and develops a high-performing workforce
OPM developed the Human Capital Assessment and Accountability Framework (HCAAF) to guide agencies in implementing the systems
Established Chief Human Capital Officers (CHCO) and the CHCO Council
Required the heads of 24 Executive Departments and agencies to appoint or designate CHCOs to serve as his/her agency’s chief policy advisor on all human resources management issues
Established a CHCO Council to advise and coordinate the activities of member agencies on such matters as the modernization of human resources systems, improved quality of human resources information, and legislation affecting human resources operations and organizations
Provided authority for the Department of Homeland Security to design its own human resources systems, including a pay-for-performance system
Issued interim Presidential Rank Awards regulations
Extended eligibility for Presidential Rank Awards to employees in SL/ST positions
Codified long-standing OPM policy regarding rank awards for career members of the SES
2000
Revised Senior Executive Service appraisal regulations
Reinforced the link between performance management and strategic planning
Required agencies to use balanced measures in evaluating executive performance
Provided agencies more flexibility to tailor performance management systems to their unique missions
1998
Revised regulations on ratings of record
Codified long-standing OPM policy regarding ratings of record
Described when a rating of record is considered final
Prohibited retroactive, carryover and assumed ratings of record
Provided limited circumstances under which an agency can change a rating of record
1997
Revised regulations on reduction in force and performance management
Allowed flexible crediting of between 12 and 20 additional years of service retention credit for ratings of record given under different summary level patterns
Retained traditional 12-16-20-year crediting when all ratings of record being credited were given under a single summary level pattern
Revised credit averaging to use actual ratings of record given without "filling in the blanks" with presumed fully successful
Removed use of presumed fully successful ratings and replaced them with credit based on the modal rating when employee had no ratings of record
Provided for immediate or delayed implementation at agency discretion to allow for education, partnership and automated system revision efforts
1995
Revised performance management regulations
Further decentralized the performance management program to allow agencies to develop programs to meet their individual needs and cultures
Established eight permissible summary rating patterns, allowing from two to five levels for summary ratings
Combined all award authorities in one part of the regulations, 5 CFR 451
Streamlined the appraisal system approval process
1993
Performance Management and Recognition System terminated
Provided for orderly termination of the PMRS, and payout of merit increases and performance awards based on October 1993 ratings
Provided for phased conversion of employees not on a step rate back to step rates based on specified personnel changes
Retained authority to pay employees at non-step rates until changes occur to place all employees on a step rate
1992
Revised regulations on summary rating levels for General Schedule and Prevailing Rate appraisal systems
Allowed summary ratings at 3, 4, or 5 levels but required agencies to include Unacceptable, Fully Successful, and Outstanding levels.
1991
Legislation again extends the Performance Management and Recognition System
Allowed using a written statement of work objectives to establish performance requirements
Removed requirement for mandatory performance award for employees rated Outstanding and the accompanying 2 percent minimum award
Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act
Provided specific legislative authority for payment of rating-based cash awards to General Schedule employees like those authorized under the Performance Management and Recognition System
Provided authority to grant paid time off as an award
1989
Legislation extends the Performance Management and Recognition System (PMRS)
Revised merit increase amount for Fully Successful employees in the middle-third of the pay range from one-third to one-half of a merit increase, to parallel step increases in the General Schedule
Set minimum performance awards funding at 1.15 percent of estimated aggregate salaries for duration of the extension
Allowed for the reassignment, removal or reduction in grade of PMRS employees who did not attain a fully successful level of performance after being given an opportunity to do so
Revised Senior Executive Service appraisal regulations
Permitted three to five summary rating levels, including Unsatisfactory, Minimally Satisfactory and Fully Successful levels specified in statute
Deleted requirement for rating period to end between June 30 and September 30
1986
Final Performance Management System regulations issued
Issued appraisal regulations for General Schedule and Prevailing Rate employees and for SES members, which paralleled Performance Management and Recognition System appraisal regulations of 1985
Regulatory pay-for-performance system established
Required Fully Successful rating for within-grade increases
Required Outstanding rating for quality step increases
Required Fully Successful rating for career-ladder promotions
Required performance award program for General Schedule and Prevailing Rate employees
1985
Final Performance Management and Recognition System appraisal and pay regulations issued
Implemented legal provisions regarding general increases, merit increases and performance awards
Established procedures for determining merit increases and performance awards for "unrateable" employees
Described pay-setting procedures when employees move between pay systems
Established minimum appraisal periods and procedures for rating employees who are detailed to other positions
Required higher-level approval of ratings and performance-based personnel actions
1984
Civil Service Retirement Spouse Equity Act
Established a 5 percent minimum performance award for Senior Executive Service members
Abolished Merit Pay System and established Performance Management and Recognition System (PMRS) covering supervisors and management officials in Grades GS 13-15 (same coverage as Merit Pay System)
Guaranteed full comparability increases to PMRS Employees rated Fully Successful or higher, half to those with Minimally Successful rating, and none to those rated Unacceptable
Guaranteed PMRS Employees merit increases of specific amount based on their performance ratings and position in pay range for their grade level
Established performance awards program for PMRS employees, with a minimum funding level from 0.75 percent to 1.15 percent of estimated aggregate salaries over five years and required a minimum performance award of 2 percent of employee's salary for an Outstanding rating; set maximum award funding at 1.5 percent of estimated aggregate salaries
Added performance appraisal revisions in PMRS requiring five summary rating levels, no forced distributions of ratings, and joint participation in setting standards
1978
Civil Service Reform Act
Agencies required to develop appraisal systems for all Federal employees
Established the U.S. Office of Personnel Management
Required OPM’s approval of appraisal systems
Appraisals must be based on job-related performance standards
Agencies must encourage employee participation in establishing performance standards
Eliminated appeal of appraisals outside an agency
Results of the appraisal must be used as a basis for training, rewarding, reassigning, promoting, reducing in grade, retaining and removing employees
Authorized removal of employees for unacceptable performance on one or more critical elements, but only after providing an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable performance; reduced the standard of proof from preponderance of evidence to substantial evidence
Authorized appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board of reductions in grade and removals
Established a separate performance appraisal system for Senior Executive Service (SES) members
Required one or more fully successful rating levels, a minimally satisfactory level, and an unsatisfactory level
Required agency Performance Review Boards to make recommendations to appointing officials on final ratings
Established performance-related pay authorities
Provided for performance awards for career executives; required at least a Fully Successful rating and the recommendation of the Performance Review Board
Provided for Senior Executive Service Meritorious (career) executive awards ($10,000 for sustained accomplishment over a period of years; limited to 5 percent of executives) and Distinguished (career) executives awards ($20,000 for sustained extraordinary accomplishment, limited to 1 percent of executives)
Established Merit Pay for supervisors and management officials in Grades GS 13-15, with funding for merit increases limited to what agency would have paid as within-grade increases, quality step increases, and half of comparability adjustments (guaranteed employees half of comparability adjustments)
1962
Salary Reform Act
Required an "acceptable level of competence" determination for granting General Schedule within-grade increases
Provided for the denial of the within-grade increase when performance is below the acceptable level
Authorized an additional step increase for "high-quality performance"
1958
Government Employees' Training Act
Provided for training to improve performance and to prepare for future advancement
1954
Incentive Awards Act
Authorized honorary recognition and cash payments for superior accomplishment, suggestions, inventions, special acts or services, or other personal efforts
1950
Performance Rating Act
Purpose was to identify the best and weakest employees and to improve supervisor-employee relations
Required the establishment of appraisal systems within all agencies, with prior approval by the Civil Service Commission
Established three summary rating levels: Outstanding, Satisfactory, and Unsatisfactory
Employees could still appeal ratings, but now through a statutory board of three members--one from an agency, one selected by employees, and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission
1940
Ramspeck Act
Directed establishment of independent Boards of Review to decide rating appeals in each agency
Boards included the Civil Service Commission and employee representatives
1935
Uniform Efficiency Rating System
The Civil Service Commission established, by regulation, the Uniform Efficiency Rating System, which was used until 1950.
Factors were grouped under the headings Quality of Performance, Productiveness, and Qualifications
There were five rating levels for each of the three categories, and also five summary rating levels.
1923
Classification Act of 1923
Resulted in establishment of a "graphic rating scale" in 1924, which was used until 1935
Was effective, but unpopular
Supervisor marked along a scale for each "service rendered"
1912
First Law on Appraisal
An appropriations act directed the U.S. Civil Service Commission (now the U.S. Office of Personnel Management) to establish a uniform efficiency rating system for all agencies.
1883
Pendleton Act, or Civil Service Act
Provided a merit system to end favoritism
Required promotions by merit competition, but no centralized appraisal system was established
Back to Top
Legal Citations
Guide to Legal Citations
The information contained in this website is based on title 5, United States Code, and title 5, Code of Federal Regulations. In an effort to help you locate the legal authority for topics related to employee performance and awards, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management has compiled the common performance management topics. The first column of each table lists the topic and other words commonly used to refer to these topics. The middle column presents a description of each topic. Use this description to determine if you would like to access the full legal citation.
Topic
Description
Citation(s)
Additional Performance Element
A type of performance element that does not affect the summary rating level but can be used to help focus employees on goals and achievements that are important to the organization.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.206(b)
Additional Service Credit
Additional years of service credit added to an employee's actual years of service when determining retention in a reduction in force. The credit is usually based on the 3 most recent ratings of record within the last 4 years.
5 CFR 351.504
5 CFR 430.208(d)(5)
Appraisal
The evaluation of performance in comparison to the elements and standards in an employee's performance plan.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.207(b)
5 CFR 430.208(b)
Appraisal Period
The period of time covered by a specific performance plan during which performance will be evaluated against elements and standards and for which a rating of record will be prepared.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.206
Appraisal Program
The specific procedures and requirements established by the organization for evaluating employee performance.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.205
Appraisal System
The agency-established framework of policies and parameters within which performance appraisal programs are designed. The Office of Personnel Management reviews and approves appraisal systems.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.204
5 CFR 430.209(a)
5 U.S.C. 4301(2)
Appraisal System Approval
The review of an agency's established parameters and flexibilities to ensure that they comport with the intent of law and regulations. An agency must submit a description of its appraisal system to OPM for approval, using OPM Form 1631.
5 CFR 430.209
5 CFR 430.210
Appraising Official
The person who evaluates an employee's performance and assigns the element rating(s) and rating of record.
5 CFR 430.207(b)
5 CFR 430.208(b)
Award
Something given or a ceremony or event held to recognize someone either as an individual or a member of a group for a specific achievement that the agency values, or as payment of a promised incentive that is often based on predetermined criteria such as productivity or performance goals.
5 CFR 451.102 (definitions)
5 CFR 451.104(a)-(c)
Awards Limitations
Awards in excess of $10,000 per individual must be approved by the Office of Personnel Management. Awards in excess of $25,000 require Presidential approval.
Awards may not be given during a Presidential election period (June 1 of an election year to January 20 of the following year) to certain employees in the excepted service or the non-career Senior Executive Service.
Cash awards may not be given to employees in certain Executive level positions when appointed by the President with Senate confirmation.
5 CFR 451.106(b)
5 U.S.C. 4502(b)
5 CFR 451.105
5 U.S.C. 4508
5 CFR 451.105
5 U.S.C. 4509
Cash Award
A lump-sum payment made to an employee in recognition of an achievement or as payment of an incentive.
5 CFR 451.104(a)-(c)
5 U.S.C. 4503
Critical Element
Those aspects of a job for which an employee can be held individually accountable and that must be done successfully in order for the organization to complete its mission.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.206(b)
Employee Involvement
Seeking and including employee ideas and opinions in the development of awards programs, performance systems and programs, and employee performance plans.
5 CFR 430.204(c)
5 CFR 430.205(d)
5 CFR 430.206(b)(1)
Forced Distribution
Limitation on the use of particular summary appraisal levels. This practice is prohibited when doing performance ratings or ratings of record.
5 CFR 430.208(c)
Government Performance and Results Act
Law requiring agencies to set organizational goals pertinent to the agency mission as well as means to accurately measure them. Such goals should be cascaded through the organization and linked to the development of employee elements and standards.
1993 Government Performance and Results Act
Invention Award
An award given for an invention developed by one or more employees. May take the form of a cash, honorary, informal recognition, or time-off award.
5 CFR 451.104(a)
Marginal Performance
The level of performance below "Fully Successful" but above "Unacceptable" that is sufficient to be retained in the position. However, agencies should assist employees to improve their performance whenever it falls below the "Fully Successful" level.
5 CFR 430.207(c)
Minimum Period
The period of time specified in an organization's appraisal program that must be completed before a performance rating may be prepared.
5 CFR 430.207(a)
Monitoring Performance
Reviewing employee performance to check progress and identify any problems.
5 CFR 430.207(b)
Non-critical Element
Aspects of an employee's job that are not critical elements that the organization wants to have impact the summary rating level. Can include aspects of shared accountability, such as group or team elements.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.206(b)
Performance Award
An award based on the employee's most recent rating of record of Level 3 (Fully Successful or equivalent) or higher. Performance awards may only take the form of cash.
5 CFR 451.104(a)
5 U.S.C. 4505(a)
Performance-Based Actions
Allows for the reduction in grade or removal of an employee based solely on performance.
5 CFR, part 432
5 CFR 430.207(d)(2)
5 U.S.C. 4302(b)(6)
Performance Management
The integrated processes of planning, monitoring, developing, rating, and rewarding employee performance.
5 CFR 430.102(a)
Performance Standards
The expression of how well an employee has to perform on the associated element in order to be appraised at a specific level. Standards should be attainable and verifiable.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.204(a)(1)(i)
5 CFR 430.206(b)(7)
5 CFR 430.207(b)
Performance Plan
The written or automated document that communicates to the employee what is expected in the job. The performance plan includes the critical and non-critical elements and standards, plus any additional elements, on which the employee will be evaluated.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.206(b)
Performance Rating
Appraisals done at other times than at the end of the appraisal period.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.208
Presidential Awards
The President has the authority to grant awards to Federal employees. OPM must approve most cash awards over $10,000. The President approves all awards of more than $25,000.
5 CFR, part 451, subpart B
5 U.S.C. 4502 (b)
5 U.S.C. 4504
Progress Review
Communication with an employee about progress on the elements in the employee's performance plan. There is no limit on the number of progress reviews a supervisor can hold during a cycle, but at least one formal progress review is required.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.207(b)
Quality Step Increase
An increase in base pay given to recognize excellence in performance. Must be based on the highest rating level used by the appraisal program (Level 5, "Outstanding," if used), and meeting agency-established criteria when the program does not use Level 5.
5 CFR, part 531, subpart E
5 U.S.C. 5336
Rating of Record
The evaluation of an employee's performance as compared to the elements and standards for performance over the entire appraisal period.
5 CFR 430.203 (definitions)
5 CFR 430.208
Recordkeeping
Instructions on how to record and report ratings of record and awards as well as how long to retain information in official files.
5 CFR 430.209(b), (e), and (f)
Reduction In Force Credit
Additional years of service credit added to an employee's actual years of service when determining retention in a reduction in force. The credit is usually based on the 3 most recent ratings of record within the last 4 years.
5 CFR 351.504
5 CFR 430.208(d)(5)
Second Level Review
Review of a rating or award recommendation by someone at a higher level in the organization than the person recommending the rating or award. Required for "Unacceptable" ratings of record. Not required for other ratings of record or awards.
5 CFR 430.208(e)
Special Act or Service Award
An award given in recognition of an employee achievement or contribution or as payment as an employee incentive. May be given to individual employees or groups of employees.
5 CFR 451.104(a)
5 U.S.C. 4503
Suggestion Award
An award granted to an employee or group of employees for an accepted suggestion.
5 CFR 451.104(a
Summary Levels
The designators assigned to the summarization of the element appraisals of employee performance done by comparing actual performance to the elements and standards in the employee's performance plan.
5 CFR 430.208(b) and (d)
Summary Pattern
The aggregation of summary appraisal levels used in a particular appraisal program. Each pattern must include summary Levels 1 ("Unacceptable") and 3 ("Fully Successful").
5 CFR 430.208(d)
Superior Accomplishment Award
An award based on the employee's most recent rating of record of Level 3 (Fully Successful or equivalent) or higher. Performance awards may only take the form of cash.
5 CFR 451.104(a)
Time-off Award
An award given to an employee or group of employees that takes the form of paid time off. May be based on performance as reflected in a rating of record or as a specific contribution.
5 CFR 451.104(a) and (f)
5 U.S.C. 4502(e)
Within-grade Increase
A periodic increase in an employee's pay based upon a Level 3 (Fully Successful or equivalent) or higher rating of record and completion of specific waiting periods. The General Schedule method of pay progression within an employee's current grade.
5 CFR, part 531, subpart D
5 U.S.C. 5335
About OPM
FOIA
No FEAR Act
Inspector General
Privacy Program
USA.gov
Accessibility
Control Panel