Home | Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government.
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The
https://
ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
U.S. Department of Labor
MENU
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Contact Us
FAQ
A to Z Index
Select Target Language
Select Language
Afrikaans
Albanian
Amharic
Arabic
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Basque
Belarusian
Bengali
Bosnian
Bulgarian
Catalan
Cebuano
Chichewa
Chinese (Simplified)
Chinese (Traditional)
Corsican
Croatian
Czech
Danish
Dutch
Esperanto
Estonian
Filipino
Finnish
French
Frisian
Galician
Georgian
German
Greek
Gujarati
Haitian Creole
Hausa
Hawaiian
Hebrew
Hindi
Hmong
Hungarian
Icelandic
Igbo
Indonesian
Irish
Italian
Japanese
Javanese
Kannada
Kazakh
Khmer
Korean
Kurdish (Kurmanji)
Kyrgyz
Lao
Latin
Latvian
Lithuanian
Luxembourgish
Macedonian
Malagasy
Malay
Malayalam
Maltese
Maori
Marathi
Mongolian
Myanmar (Burmese)
Nepali
Norwegian
Pashto
Persian
Polish
Portuguese
Punjabi
Romanian
Russian
Samoan
Scots Gaelic
Serbian
Sesotho
Shona
Sindhi
Sinhala
Slovak
Slovenian
Somali
Spanish
Sundanese
Swahili
Swedish
Tajik
Tamil
Telugu
Thai
Turkish
Ukrainian
Urdu
Uzbek
Vietnamese
Welsh
Xhosa
Yiddish
Yoruba
Zulu
Languages
اَلْعَرَبِيَّةُ
(Arabic)
Sinugbuanong Binisayâ
(Cebuano)
简体字
(Chinese-Simplified)
繁体字
(Chinese-Traditional)
English
Français
(French)
Kreyòl ayisyen
(Haitian Creole)
한국어
(Korean)
नेपाली
(Nepali)
Polski
(Polish)
Português
(Portuguese (Brazilian))
Русский
(Russian)
Af-Soomaali
(Somali)
Español
(Spanish)
Українська
(Ukrainian)
Tiếng Việt
(Vietnamese)
Search
Search
OSHA
Back
OSHA
About OSHA
Find an OSHA Office
State Plans
Job Safety and Health Poster
Careers
Freedom of Information Act
Speaker Requests
Standards
Back
Standards
Law and Regulations
Federal Registers
Open for Comment
Regulatory Agenda
Letters of Interpretation
Training Requirements by Standard
Enforcement
Back
Enforcement
OSHA Enforcement
Whistleblower Protection Program
Annual Inspection Data
Topics
Back
Topics
For Employers
Worker Rights
Workers Memorial
Fall Prevention
Hazard Communication
Heat
Personal Protective Equipment
Suicide Prevention
Trenching and Excavation
By Sector
Agriculture
Construction
Federal Agencies
Healthcare
Maritime
Oil and Gas
Warehousing
Key Topics
Recordkeeping Requirements and Forms
Safety and Health Programs
Support After a Loss
Whistleblower Protections
HELP AND RESOURCES
Back
Help and Resources
Data
Establishment Search
Fatality Reports
File a Complaint
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Publications
Safety and Health Topics Pages
Videos
Compliance Assistance
Compliance Assistance Specialists
Consultation Services
Cooperative Programs
Small Business Resources
Training
Training Requirements and Resources
Outreach Training Program (10- and 30-hour Cards)
Find a Trainer
Replace a Card
Avoid Card Fraud
OSHA Training Institute Education Centers
Search for Classes
Susan Harwood Training Grants
NEWS
Back
News
Federal Registers
Media Center
News Releases
QuickTakes Newsletter
Información Rápida
Contact Us
FAQ
A to Z Index
Languages
اَلْعَرَبِيَّةُ
(Arabic)
Sinugbuanong Binisayâ
(Cebuano)
简体字
(Chinese-Simplified)
繁体字
(Chinese-Traditional)
English
Français
(French)
Kreyòl ayisyen
(Haitian Creole)
한국어
(Korean)
नेपाली
(Nepali)
Polski
(Polish)
Português
(Portuguese (Brazilian))
Русский
(Russian)
Af-Soomaali
(Somali)
Español
(Spanish)
Українська
(Ukrainian)
Tiếng Việt
(Vietnamese)
Workers have the right to speak up about safety and health issues at work without fear of retaliation
Remembering Lost Workers
José Antonio Vasco, 68
Deborah A. Schmitt, 57
Steven Matthew Jason II, 41
Benjamin Lionel Bonura, 26
Derek Marcus Burpo, 51
Daniel Jeremy Carrasco, 35
Miguel Angel Antich, 70
Kory L. McDonald , 22
Harland E. Woodward Jr., 58
P.J. Kerce, Jr., 84
Sign up to participate in Safe & Sound Week
Celebrating America's workers
Heat Safety: Water. Rest. Shade.
Watch: Trench Safety Rescue Demo
Useful Links
Learn How to File a Complaint
Report a Fatality or Severe Injury
Explore Voluntary Protection Programs
Schedule a No-Cost Consultation
Find or Request a Letter of Interpretation
Find News and Media Tools
Stay Up-to-Date with OSHA Newsletters
View Upcoming Events
Follow us on Social Media
Facebook
X
Instagram
Linkedin
Youtube
×
Subscribe
Sign up to receive Safety Reminders by email.
Enter your email address:
×
COVID-19 Workplace Safety Reminders
Workplace Safety Reminders
Find resources for cleaning up after a storm at osha.gov/hurricane.
×
More Safety Reminders
Learn how to stay safe during your seasonal job.
Access small business resources in multiple languages.
Prevent cold stress with proper protection.
Always wear a seatbelt when operating a forklift.
9 ways to protect workers this holiday season.
Explore our holiday workplace safety resources.
Download our Small Business Safety and Health Handbook.
The holiday season is a good time to discuss safety with workers.
Safety isn’t seasonal – make it a priority every day.
Get help anytime: Call or text 988 for free, confidential support.
Use rollover protective structures on tractors.
Have emergency supply kits and keep them in easily accessible shelter locations.
Know the warning signs of suicide.
Share these five tips for safe grain handling.
Review your emergency action plan.
Display our Suicide Prevention poster in your workplace.
Get resources to help protect farm and ranch workers.
Watch for overhead and downed power lines when clearing debris.
Talk about solutions to help prevent suicide.
Train workers on emergency plans.
Sept. 8-12 is Construction Suicide Prevention Week.
Prepare an agricultural safety emergency action plan.
Take steps now to protect workers from tropical storms and hurricanes.
Help prevent suicides in construction.
Make an emergency action plan for your farm today.
Minimize the escape of dust from equipment or ventilation systems.
Storms can move fast. Be ready – know your plan and shelter spot.
Find resources for hurricane preparedness and response.
Practice storm evacuation plans on a regular basis.
Learn 5 things about grain safety.
Check, test, clean, and control hazardous dust.
View our resources to help address workplace stress.
Use our Hurricane eMatrix tool for recommendations on PPE.
After storms, ticks can thrive in wet, grassy areas. Wear long sleeves, use repellent, and check for ticks.
Learn how to stay safe while cleaning up after floods.
For help with workplace stress, call or text 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org.
Turn off and lock out equipment before entering grain bins.
Join thousands of businesses for Safe + Sound Week to keep workers safe.
Never walk down grain to make it flow.
Emergency preparedness can save lives. Make a plan and review it often.
It's not too late! Register and promote your events during Safe + Sound Week.
Looking to improve safety and health at your worksite? See how VPP can help.
National Whistleblower Day is July 30.
☀️New and returning workers need to adjust to heat.
Did you know you can file two types of complaints?
Do you know how to “fell a tree” safely? If not, click here.
Clearly mark work zones to avoid accidental entry.
We have tools for safe storm cleanup and recovery.
Have you been trained to use the wood chipper safely?
🪜 Never use a damaged stepladder.
STOP - only use your generator in a well-ventilated area.
Stay hydrated even when you're not at work.
It's hot - think WATER, REST, SHADE every day.
Review your safety plans before setting up a fireworks display.
🎆Have you covered the firework fuses to prevent accidental ignition?
Hurricane ready? Plan. Equip. Train. Practice.
Access OSHA Spanish-language compliance assistance resources.
Ag employers: Prep now for disasters - natural and man-made.
A workplace weather emergency kit should include these supplies to handle disruptions from weather-related events.
Have trained professionals check for falling tree hazards.
Evacuate safely: Include key steps in your emergency plan.
Use this checklist to help develop an action plan for severe weather emergencies.
Ensure safe entry and exit from a trench.
Plan ahead – get workers to safety before the storm!
Know the risks: Are your workers exposed to hurricane hazards?
Allow workers to adjust to the heat.
See how Letters of Interpretation can help your business.
Practice storm evacuation plans on a regular basis.
Know where underground utilities are located before digging.
Download the small business self-inspection checklist app.
Don't drive forklifts near the edge of the loading dock.
☀️Know the signs of heat illness and act quickly.
Wear proper PPE when using chainsaws and chippers
Schedule a free on-site consultation for your small business
Help is always available. Call or text 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org.
Confined spaces can increase risk of heat illness.
Access free resources to help reduce workplace stress.
Use proper fall protection on vessels.
Use fall protection when working 6 ft. or more above ground.
Join the National Safety Stand-Down to Prevent Falls, May 5-9.
Only use aerial lifts with fall protection equipment.
Keep materials away from the edge of a trench.
Find a Workers Memorial Day event near you.
Hydrate before, during and after working in the heat.
Thursday, April 24: Join us for Workers Memorial Day Ceremony 1:00 PM EDT. Watch live.
Before entering a trench, remember: Slope It. Shore It. Shield It.
Floods don’t wait – have an evacuation plan ready.
Have new workers? Allow them to build tolerance to the heat.
Wear high-visibility clothing in work zones.
Climbing gear isn’t one-size-fits all – choose the right fit for the tree size.
Keep tree work at least 10 feet away from power lines.
Visit our Tornado Response and Recovery page to keep workers safe.
Know how to avoid fall, caught-in or caught-between, struck-by and electrocution hazards.
View the latest data about injuries in your workplace.
Train cold storage workers on extreme temperature hazards.
Only employers of a certain size and industry must provide data.
You can file a whistleblower complaint within 30 days.
When it’s cold out, schedule work after the day warms up.
Download the newest data on hearing loss.
Have an emergency kit ready for winter weather.
Check if you’re required to submit injury and illness data.
Train workers on the symptoms of cold stress.
Warm up then shovel snow in small amounts.
Employers can now submit 2024 injury and illness data.
There’s still time to comment on OSHA’s proposed heat rule.
Improve safety at work. Download our small business app.
See national and local trends in workplace injuries.
Check out our most popular downloads.
Determine what PPE is necessary to protect workers.
View data on 30,000+ injuries among nurses.
Did you submit your comments on the proposed heat rule?
Train, evaluate and certify all forklift operators.
Submit your injury and illness data starting Jan. 2.
Use proper PPE at forklift charging stations.
Use our app to select safety checklists relevant to your business.
Submit your comments today on the proposed heat rule.
View our small business resources in multiple languages.
Safety isn’t seasonal – make it a priority when preparing orders.
Don’t allow anyone under 18 to operate a forklift.
Download the small business self-inspection checklist app.
Put our new injury tracking data to work.
Submit your comments on the proposed heat rule by Jan. 14, 2025.
Check out our holiday workplace safety resources.
Your package is worth the wait! Prioritize safety.
Set truck parking brakes and perform tug test.
Provide continuous driver safety training.
Use forklift horns at cross aisles and obstructed areas.
9 ways to protect workers this holiday season.
Download our Small Business Safety and Health Handbook.
The holiday season is a good time to discuss safety with workers.
Prohibit the use of portable electronics when driving.
Seasonal workers have the same rights as full-time workers.
We have new resources for training and toolbox talks!
Ensure vehicles are safe and properly maintained.
Enforce proper backing up techniques for farm equipment.
5 things you should know about grain safety.
Bring holiday hires up to speed on safety.
Always wear seatbelts when operating a forklift.
Stand clear when opening doors to unload deliveries.
Know how to protect yourself during flu season.
Join us for a free webinar on safety during hurricane cleanup.
Keep forklifts clear of dock edges.
Don’t miss out – register for our free webinar on hurricane response.
Introducing members of our team.
File a retaliation complaint within 30 days.
Employers are required to provide hearing exams and protection.
See 5 things you should know about filing a retaliation complaint.
Designate quiet areas so workers can gain relief.
Get to know us – We are OSHA.
Exposure to loud noise results in permanent hearing loss.
Know when to report a fatality or serious injury.
Help your small business with a free on-site consultation.
Select low-noise tools and machinery.
Protect workers from slips, trips and falls during disaster response.
Check out our resources on storm cleanup and recovery.
Clearly mark work zones to avoid accidental entry.
Always place portable generators outdoors and far from enclosed areas.
Wear proper PPE when removing downed trees.
Wear PPE when working in contaminated floodwaters.
Learn how to use our Severe Injury Report dashboard.
Mark’s employer retaliated after he complained. See how he prevailed.
Know your workplace noise levels.
Look for broken branches before trimming trees.
Get help after losing a colleague or loved one on the job.
Employees who complain about food safety are protected from retaliation.
Watch a father describe the loss of his son from heat illness.
Prepare workers for emergencies and have a plan.
Allow workers to acclimatize to heat.
Train workers on heat illness prevention.
There is help when coping with work-related stress.
We remember the lives lost and those forever affected by 9/11.
Provide workers with water, rest, and shade.
Hydration is essential to preventing heat-related illness.
We want to hear from you. Comment on the proposed heat rule by Dec. 30.
Workers have the right to a workplace safe from heat hazards.
Know retaliation protection by industry.
Some jobs are more likely to lead to injuries.
Did you know you can file two types of complaints?
Various laws protect you from retaliation for reporting violations.
View Injury Tracking Application data updates.
Safe + Sound Week is here! Get involved.
Watch this new video about whistleblower complaints.
Find bilingual materials and activities for Safe + Sound Week.
See which jobs led to injuries last year. We have the data.
Promote your events during Safe + Sound Week.
You have the right to speak up about unsafe working conditions.
Not everyone tolerates heat the same way.
Know your rights this National Whistleblower Day.
Engage your workers in activities to promote safety.
Employers can’t retaliate against you for speaking up about hazards.
Join Safe + Sound Week, Aug. 12-18.
Properly evaluate vessel confined spaces.
Train workers in a language they understand.
Feeling lucky? Enter our Beat the Heat photo contest.
Know how to safely use and store cleaning chemicals.
Talk about mental health at work.
Our photo contest is open to you.
Stay hydrated to prevent heat illness.
Follow OSHA standards on machine guarding.
Train workers on the hazards of cleaning chemicals.
Capture photos promoting heat safety by July 19.
Allow new and returning workers time to build tolerance to heat.
Properly install firework mortar boxes, racks and drums.
Submit your photos showing indoor heat safety.
Board vessels using a gangway or ladder.
Enter for a chance to win our heat photo competition.
Require employees to wear a personal flotation device.
Follow safe lifting and loading practices at ship terminals.
Summer starts today – think heat prep every day.
Photograph and submit your heat safety images.
Ensure vessel confined spaces are ventilated.
Evaluate the hazards preservative coatings present on vessels.
Share your photos of outdoor heat safety.
Know the hazards associated with shipbreaking.
Inspect lifting devices before their use on reefers.
Train small boat operators before conducting diving activities.
Show us heat safety in action! Enter our photo contest.
Use proper fall protection on vessels.
View our resources on workplace stress.
Enter our Beat the Heat photo contest!
Remind workers to drink water throughout their shift.
Create a written heat plan.
Know how to protect workers from falls.
Remind workers of available mental health services.
Use fall protection when working 6 ft. or more above ground.
Assemble an emergency kit and keep it ready.
You have the right to receive protection from excessive heat.
Help workers acclimate to heat.
3 steps to prevent falls: Plan. Provide. Train.
Train workers on heat illness prevention.
Join the National Safety Stand-Down to Prevent Falls, May 6-10.
Today, we are bringing our workplace safety expo to you virtually!
If you’ve lost a colleague or family on the job. Join us today.
Take 30 minutes today and see how we can help you.
Show your support for every worker coming home safely.
We honor fallen workers. Share their story.
Contact us if you lost someone to a work-related incident.
Register for our Workers Memorial Day ceremony.
Commemorate loved ones lost on the job.
Use authorized signaling methods in work zones.
Save the date for Workers Memorial Day.
Provide required training for landscaping and horticulture workers.
Get help coping with a work-related loss of a loved one.
Join us for Workers Memorial events April 22-25.
Exit routes should be clearly marked and well lit.
Inject mindful moments into your day to de-stress and do your best.
Don’t leave tools on stepladders.
Locate escape routes and emergency exits.
Look for overhead power lines before handling a ladder.
Conduct evacuation drills in case of a fire.
Avoid using ladders on soft ground.
Limit the accumulation of grain dust through housekeeping.
Call 988 if you are struggling with mental health.
Train workers on emergency action plans.
Don’t place a ladder on unstable bases.
Turn off and lock out equipment before entering bins.
Join us for the Grain Safety Stand Up.
Maintain a 3-point contact when climbing a ladder.
Ensure PPE properly fits workers of all body types.
Don't enter a bin when grain is built up on the side.
Tomorrow is the deadline to submit injury and illness data.
Stand Up for Grain Safety: March 25-29
Remove snow from your boots before climbing a ladder.
Protect workers from cold stress.
Keep doors to cold storage areas unlocked.
Warm up then shovel snow in small amounts.
Know how to properly dress for the cold.
Employers, never provide injury and illness data that could identify a worker.
Train workers on the symptoms of cold stress.
Refuel a snow blower before starting it.
Encourage workers to change out of wet clothes and footwear.
Only employers of a certain size and industry must provide data.
Apply for an OSHA internship by Feb. 20.
Train cold storage workers on extreme temperature hazards.
Learn ways to prepare your workplace before an earthquake hits.
Mark any rooftop hazards hidden by snow.
Learn how to submit injury and illness data in this free webinar.
Properly insulate or ground guy wires.
Register for a free webinar about our Injury Tracking Application.
Use caution when walking on rail car platforms.
Request a free, confidential on-site consultation for your business.
Train workers on how to properly use ladders.
Properly label chemical hazards.
New to ITA? It’s easy. Create ITA and Login.gov accounts.
Allow workers to use a restroom when needed.
Use proper PPE when operating a chainsaw.
See how compliance assistance specialists help workplaces.
Keep walking and working surfaces clean and free of debris.
Check if you’re required to submit injury and illness data.
Schedule winter work breaks in warm dry areas.
Ensure that safety data sheets are readily accessible for use.
Train workers on how to properly wear PPE.
See new requirements for submitting injury and illness data.
Ensure floors are dry to avoid slips.
Take frequent breaks during snow removal.
Contact your outreach trainer to replace an OSHA card.
We are now accepting employers’ injury and illness data.
View a sample hazard communication label.
Help your small business with a free on-site consultation.
Submit your injury and illness data starting Jan. 2.
Prepare workers for emergencies and have a plan.
Avoid touching your nose, mouth, and eyes during flu season.
When it’s cold out, schedule work after the day warms up.
Review injury and illness reporting requirements for 2024.
Use vehicle horns at cross aisles and obstructed areas.
Ensure dock ladders and stairs meet OSHA specifications.
Have an emergency kit ready for winter weather.
Report unsafe conditions to a supervisor.
Wear seatbelts when operating a forklift.
Ensure pinch points are adequately guarded.
Create a flexible staffing plan to reduce workplace stress.
Have clear visibility of work area when operating a forklift.
Ensure vehicles are safe and properly maintained.
Properly position insulators on ungrounded guy wires.
Park trucks on level ground and close to receiving door/site.
Seasonal workers have the same rights as full-time workers.
Allow workers to acclimatize to the cold.
Learn the key facts about rail car safety.
Train young workers to recognize workplace hazards.
Provide proper lighting and work surfaces near conveyors.
Learn 9 ways to protect workers this holiday season.
Train, evaluate and certify all forklift operators.
Check out our holiday workplace safety resources.
Learn how to stay safe during your seasonal job.
Have an emergency plan if you’re expecting large crowds.
Train flaggers on work zone safety.
For help with workplace stress, call, text or chat 988.
Review the contractor diving plan.
3 steps to prevent falls: Plan. Provide. Train.
Ensure proper access to scaffold.
Use authorized signaling methods in work zones.
Place heavier stock loads on lower or middle shelves.
Access interactive web-based training.
Only trained and certified workers should operate a forklift.
Train workers on heat illness prevention.
Not everyone tolerates heat the same way.
Reduce injury costs and increase profitability.
Enter for a chance to win our Beat the Heat contest.
Keep work 10 ft. away from power lines.
Train, evaluate and certify forklift operators.
Introducing a new process for employers to report Form 300A.
Workers need to build tolerance to heat and take frequent breaks.
Use self-inspection checklists to identify workplace hazards.
Use a safety harness and an anchored lifeline.
Scroll to Top
OSHA
Standards
Enforcement
Topics
Media Center
Contact Us
U.S. Department of Labor
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
200 Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20210
1-800-321-OSHA
1-800-321-6742
www.osha.gov
Federal Government
White House
Disaster Recovery Assistance
DisasterAssistance.gov
USA.gov
No Fear Act Data
U.S. Office of Special Counsel
Occupational Safety & Health
Frequently Asked Questions
A - Z Index
Freedom of Information Act - OSHA
Read The OSHA Newsletter
Subscribe to the OSHA Newsletter
OSHA Publications
Office of Inspector General
ABOUT THE SITE
Freedom of Information Act
Disclaimers
Plug-ins Used on DOL.gov
Accessibility Statement
Privacy & Security Statement
Important Website Notices
Site Map
Connect With OSHA
Facebook
X
Instagram
Youtube
Linkedin
Site Map
Important Website Notices
Privacy & Security Statement
×
Remind Me Later