CM-601 Introduction | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
CM-601 Introduction
CM-601 Introduction
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1983-4
Concise Display Name
CM-601 Introduction
Issue Date
03-01-1983
General Topics
Charge Analysis
Summary
This document provides charge processing and investigation instructions for investigators.
Citation
Title VII, EPA, ADEA, ADA, GINA, 29 CFR Part 1601
Document Applicant
EEOC Investigators
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
5/3/91
SUBJECT.  EEOC COMPLIANCE MANUAL, VOLUME II
PURPOSE.  This transmittal forwards EEOC Order 915.002, which revised those parts of EEOC Order 915, EEOC Compliance Manual, dated January 26, 1979, pertaining to Volume II, Interpretations. No revisions have been made to individual sections
of Volume II.
ORIGINATOR.  Coordination and Guidance Services, Office of Legal Counsel.
EFFECTIVE DATE.  May 3, 1991
DISTRIBUTION.  EEOC Compliance Manual Holders.
CURRENT CHANGES.  None.
OBSOLETE DATA AND FILING INSTRUCTIONS.  The attached EEOC Order 915.002 supersedes EEOC Order 915, dated January 26, 1979, as it pertains to Volume II, Interpretations" EEOC Order 915.002 should be filed before the List of Sections preceding
Section 601 of Volume II.
___________________________________
Thomasina V. Rogers
Legal Counsel
EEOC Compliance Manual
Volume II
EEOC Order 915.002
(Complete Compliance Manual with updates through December 1, 1991)
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
EEOC ORDER NO.
915.002
Washington, D.C.
20507
May 3, 1991
EEOC COMPLIANCE MANUAL
SUBJECT. VOLUME II -- INTERPRETATIONS MANUAL
PURPOSE. This Order prescribes EEOC Compliance Manual, Volume II, Interpretations Manual, which serves primarily as a reference source interpreting the laws administered and enforced by the Commission and providing substantive legal guidance on
various issues arising under these laws based on Commission policy and decisions and on case law. The Interpretations Manual also serves as an investigative aid, providing guidance in analyzing and investigating allegations of unlawful employment
discrimination in charges and complaints presented to the Commission. The guidance provided pursuant to this Order is issued in the form of individual sections of Volume II and separate Commission policy documents relating to and supplementing
matters discussed in specific sections. Following initial issuance, Commission policy documents are subsequently incorporated as appendices to the pertinent sections of Volume II.
EFFECTIVE DATE, May 3, 1991
ORIGINATOR. Coordination and Guidance Services, Office of Legal Counsel.
APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of this Order apply to each local, area, field, district, and headquarters office.
Modifications of and deviations from the established guidance and procedures set forth in this Order are not authorized unless necessitated by intervening legal developments affecting the continued validity of existing Volume II guidance and
precedents. Where such modifications or deviations are necessary, they must be cleared with and approved by the Office of Legal Counsel. Offices may, however, establish standard operating procedures and other written guidance to complement EEOC
Compliance Manual, Volume II, provided that such written guidance does not otherwise conflict with the provisions of this Order. Such written guidance shall be published as office supplements, with copies forwarded to the Office of Legal Counsel and
the Office of Program Operations.
DISTRIBUTION: Compliance Manual Holders
RESPONSIBILITIES.
The Legal Counsel
is responsible for planning and directing, in consultation with the Offices of Program Operations, General Counsel, Federal Operations, and other appropriate offices, the development, maintenance, updating, and revision
of the substantive and procedural provisions of this Order.
The Director of the Office of Program Operations, the
General Counsel, and the Directors of the Office of
Federal Operations and other appropriate offices
are responsible for reviewing proposed Volume II sections and
Commission policy documents supplementing Volume II sections and for recommending revisions, additions, and deletions, as appropriate, to both existing and proposed sections and policy documents.
District and other field office directors
are responsible for reviewing proposed Volume II sections and for recommending revisions, additions, and deletions, as appropriate, to both existing and proposed sections. District and other field
office directors are also responsible for reviewing Commission policy documents following their issuance by the Commission and prior to their incorporation into Volume II as appendices to the various sections.
District directors and all other office directors
are responsible for ensuring that all employees adhere to the policies and procedures prescribed by this Order. All district and other office directors are also responsible for reporting
any difficulties experienced in implementing these policies and procedures to the Office of Legal Counsel, as well as for making recommendations and suggestions concerning new or improved policies and procedures.
Office heads
are responsible for ensuring that copies of this Order distributed to their offices are kept up to date by reviewing on a monthly basis EEOC Notices in the N-205 series, which are monthly listings of EEOC publications
released during the preceding month, and for supervising the public inspection and copying of this Order in their offices.
REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EEOC COMPLIANCE MANUAL.
The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requires that Volume II of the Compliance Manual, in its entirety, be made available for public inspection and copying. The various sections of Volume II, together with the policy documents supplementing
these sections, come within the FOIA provisions mandating availability for inspection and copying of "those statements of policy and interpretations which have been adopted by the agency and are not published in the Federal Register" and
"administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff that affect a member of the public."
See
5 U.S.C. Section 552(a)(2)(b) and (c).
In order to allow maximum access to the public, one complete Volume II shall be made available in each local, area, field, and district office and in the public reading area of the Commission's library in Washington, D.C. Although Manual holders
may allow public inspection of the Volume II that is assigned to them, it is recommended that one specific copy be made available in each local, area, field, and district office library. Local, area, field, and district directors may designate one
copy by labeling the volume on the binder edge with the words: "Library Copy for Public Inspection."
Supplements to the provisions of this Order published in accordance with EEOC Order 205.001 and paragraph 5(b) of this Order must also be made available to the public.
Photocopies of individual pages or sections are to be provided to the public on request in accordance with the price list contained in Section 1610.15 of the Commission's FOIA Regulations, 29 C.F.R. Section 1610.15. Fees for copying are to be
collected and accounted for in accordance with EEOC Order 471, Collection Procedures for Funds Due the United States.
Draft Volume II materials sent to office heads for comment are not to be included in the published copy made available to the public for inspection.
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR ACCOUNTABILITY, DISTRIBUTION, AND POSTING OF CHANCES AND ADDITIONS.
Each office head shall ensure that the office receives and maintains a sufficient number of copies of Volume II to meet the needs of office staff.
A complete copy of Volume II shall be assigned and/or made available to each local, area, field, and district office investigator, supervisor, and attorney and to appropriate headquarters staff.
Each time a Directives Transmittal entitled "EEOC Compliance Manual, Volume II" is issued, a sufficient number of transmittals and materials covered by the transmittal shall be automatically distributed by the Office of Management to each office
based on that office's completed EEOC Form 203, Initial Distribution of Directives, prepared and submitted in accordance with EEOC Order 205.001, Appendix E, paragraph 2c. If an insufficient number is received or if a review of EEOC Notices in the
N-205 series discloses an issuance that has not been received by an office, that office shall request additional copies in accordance with EEOC Order 205.001, Appendix E, paragraph 2e, from the Library Management Branch, Resource Management
Division.
Volume II holders should comply with the obsolete data instructions on each Directives Transmittal they receive entitled "EEOC Compliance Manual, Volume II." After complying with the obsolete data instructions, the Directives Transmittal should
be initialed and dated below the transmittal number and date blocks and should be filed behind this Order so that the most recent Directives Transmittal is uppermost. Upon receipt of each Directives Transmittal that makes changes to this Order,
office heads and supervisors shall ensure that all copies of this Order assigned to that office are properly posted and current.
Policy documents
providing current guidance on specific issues and relating to and supplementing matters addressed in particular Volume II sections will be issued periodically as EEOC Notices in the N-915 series. As an exception to EEOC
Order 205.001, Appendix B, Attachment 4, Section a(5), these notices will remain in effect until rescinded or superseded. Until a policy document is incorporated into Volume II as an appendix to a specific section, it should be filed with the
section to which it pertains in accordance with the instructions provided in the notice.
ACCESSIBILITY TO INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES. Upon request, a copy of Volume II or specific sections thereof shall be made available to an individual with a disability in an accessible format meeting the individual's needs by the Office of
Equal Employment Opportunity in accordance with the provisions of EEOC Order 560.004, Accessible Information Policy, unless that office determines that the document requested is too voluminous and presents an undue hardship to produce on audiotape
or in another accessible format.
APPENDIX. A list of the current and proposed future sections of Volume II is appended to this Order as Appendix A.
OBSOLETE DATA. This Order supersedes those parts of EEOC Order 915, EEOC Compliance Manual, dated January 26, 1979, pertaining to Volume II, Interpretations.
___________________________________
Thomesina V. Rogers
Legal Counsel
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov