Disability Discrimination and Employment Decisions | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Disability Discrimination and Employment Decisions
Disability Discrimination and Employment Decisions
Disability discrimination occurs when an
employer or other entity covered
by Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (which protects private and state and local employees) or the Rehabilitation Act (which protects federal employees) treats a qualified employee or applicant unfavorably because of disability.  The disability laws forbid discrimination when it comes to any aspect of employment, including hiring, firing, pay, job assignments, promotions, layoff, training, fringe benefits, and any other term or condition of employment.
Definition of Disability
The ADA directs that the definition of disability is construed broadly, in favor of extensive coverage, to the maximum extent permitted by the law. Nonetheless, not everyone with a medical condition is protected from disability discrimination. Under the law, a person has a disability if the person:
Has a physical or mental condition that substantially limits a major life activity (such as walking, talking, seeing, hearing, or learning, or operation of a major bodily function, such as brain, musculoskeletal, respiratory, circulatory, or endocrine function).
Has a history of a disability.
Is subject to an adverse employment action because of a physical or mental impairment the individual actually has or is perceived to have, except if it is transitory (lasting or expected to last six months or less)
and
minor.
A medical condition does not need to be long-term, permanent, or severe to be substantially limiting.  Also, if symptoms come and go, what matters is how limiting the symptoms are when they are active.
Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship
When job applicants or employees request job modifications, the disability laws require employers in the private,
federal
, and state and local government sectors to provide
reasonable accommodations
(changes to the ways things are usually done) to employees and job applicants who have or had an impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, unless doing so would cause undue hardship for the employer. A reasonable accommodation can help a person with a disability apply for a job, perform the duties of a job, or enjoy the benefits and privileges of employment.
Some possible reasonable accommodations could be making the workplace accessible for wheelchair users, providing a reader or interpreter for someone who is blind or hearing impaired, making a schedule change, granting telework, allowing leave for disability-related treatment or symptoms, or reassignment to a vacant position where reasonable accommodation is not possible in the current job.
An employer doesn't have to provide an accommodation if doing so would cause undue hardship to the business.  Undue hardship means that the accommodation would be too difficult or too expensive to provide, in light of the employer's size, financial resources, and the needs of the business. An employer may not refuse to provide an accommodation, however, just because it involves some cost. An employer does not have to provide the accommodation the employee or job applicant wants, as long as it provides an effective reasonable accommodation.  If more than one accommodation effectively meets the disability-related needs, the employer may choose which one to provide
Disability-Related Questions, Medical Exams, and Confidentiality
The
law places limits on employers
when it comes to asking job applicants or employees to answer disability-related questions, take a medical exam, or identify a disability.  Information that employers may obtain about employees’ disabilities must be treated as confidential.
During Employment Application & Interview Stage
An employer may not ask a job applicant to answer disability-related questions, such as if they have a disability, or require them to take a medical exam, before extending a job offer. An employer may ask job applicants whether they can perform the job and how they would perform the job, with or without a reasonable accommodation.
After A Job Offer
After a job is offered to an applicant, the law allows an employer to condition the job offer on the applicant answering disability-related questions and/or successfully passing a medical exam, but
only if
all new employees in the same type of job have to answer the questions and/or take the exam.  An employer may only revoke the job offer if the information reveals the individual cannot safely perform the job (even with reasonable accommodation, if entitled to it).
After Employment Starts
Once an employee is hired and has started work, an employer generally can only ask disability-related questions and/or require a medical exam if the employer needs medical information to support an employee's request for an accommodation or if the employer has objective evidence that an employee is not able to perform a job successfully or safely because of a medical condition.
Confidentiality
The law also requires that employers keep all medical records and information confidential and in separate medical files.
Harassment
It is illegal to harass an applicant or employee because of a current or past disability an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment that is not transitory and minor, or for association with an individual with a disability. Harassment can include offensive remarks about a person's disability. Harassment is illegal when it is so frequent or severe that it creates a hostile or offensive work environment or when it results in an adverse employment decision (such as the victim being fired or demoted). Unlawful harassment may occur whether the harasser is the victim's supervisor, a supervisor in another area, a co-worker, or someone who is not an employee of the employer, such as a client or customer.
Retaliation and Interference
Job applicants and current and former employees are protected from
retaliation
for asserting their rights under the ADA and any of the other federal
equal employment opportunity laws
.  Speaking out about or exercising rights related to workplace discrimination is called “protected activity” and can take many forms, including complaining to a supervisor about harassment.  Witnesses who seek to assist individuals affected by discrimination are also protected.
The ADA also prohibits interference with an individual’s ADA rights.  Employers may not intimidate, threaten, or otherwise interfere with a job applicant’s or current or former employee’s exercise of ADA rights.  For instance, it is unlawful for an employer to use threats to discourage an individual from asking for a reasonable accommodation or to pressure them not to file a
disability discrimination complaint
.
Association
The law also protects people from discrimination based on their relationship with a person with a disability (even if they do not themselves have a disability). For example, it is illegal to discriminate against an employee because the employee’s spouse has a disability.
Although the federal anti-discrimination laws don't require an employer to provide a reasonable accommodation to an employee to care for a family member with a disability, the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) may require an employer to take such steps. The
Department of Labor
enforces the FMLA.
Available Resources
Return to the
EEOC Disability-Related Resources
page.
Translate this Page
عربي (Arabic)
English
Español (Spanish)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Português (Portuguese)
More information about Disability Discrimination:
EEOC Disability-Related Resources
Recent EEOC Disability News
New Disability-Related Publications
Time Limits
180 days to
file a charge
(may be extended by state laws)
Federal employees have 45 days to
contact an EEO counselor
.
Employer Coverage
15 or more employees
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov