EEOC's Alternative Dispute Resolution Policy | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
EEOC's Alternative Dispute Resolution Policy
EEOC's Alternative Dispute Resolution Policy
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1995-2
Concise Display Name
EEOC's Alternative Dispute Resolution Policy
Issue Date
07-17-1995
General Topics
Charge Processing
Summary
This 1995 document addresses the Commission’s position on alternative dispute resolution programs.
Citation
Title VII
Document Applicant
Employers, Employees, Applicants, Attorneys and Practitioners, EEOC Staff
Previous Revision
No.
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
NOTICE
Number
EEOC
915.002
Date
7/17/95
1 .
SUBJECT:
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's Alternative Dispute Resolution Policy Statement
2.
PURPOSE:
This policy statement sets out the Commission's policy on Alternative Dispute Resolution
3.
EFFECTIVE DATE
: Upon receipt
4.
EXPIRATION DATE
: As an exception to EEOC Order 205.001, Appendix 6, Attachment 4, a(5), this Notice will remain in effect until rescinded or superseded.
5.
ORIGINATOR:
Legal Services, Office of Legal Counsel
6.
INSTRUCTIONS:
File in Volume 11 of the Compliance Manual.
7.
SUBJECT MATTER.
Introduction
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is firmly committed to using alternative methods for resolving disputes in all of its activities, where appropriate and feasible. Used properly in appropriate circumstances, alternative dispute resolution (ADR) can provide faster, less expensive and contentious, and more productive results in eliminating workplace discrimination, as well as in Commission operations.
The use of ADR is fully consistent with EEOC's mission as a law enforcement agency. It is squarely based in the statutes creating and enforced by the Commission Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, the Equal Pay Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act. The use of ADR is also predicated on the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act (ADRA), pursuant to which this policy is being adopted, Executive Orders 12778 and 12871, and the National Performance Review. Finally, the Commission's 1995 ADR Task Force Report made a strong and persuasive case for the use of ADR programs.
Core Principles Governing Commission ADR Programs
Any use of ADR under Commission auspices will be governed by certain core principles. Above all, any Commission ADR program must further the agency's mission. It must also be fair, which requires voluntariness, neutrality, confidentiality, and enforceability. Recognition of the differing circumstances that obtain in the Commission's District Offices suggests that ADR be flexible enough to respond to varied and changing priorities and caseloads. In addition, any EEOC ADR programs must have adequate training and evaluation components.
Furthering the Commission's Mission
First and foremost, an effective ADR program must further the EEOC's dual mission: vigorously enforcing federal laws prohibiting employment discrimination and resolving employment disputes. ADR will complement current systems in operation by facilitating early resolution of disputes where agreement is possible, thereby freeing up resources for identifying, investigating, settling, conciliating or litigating other matters.
(1)
These improvements in our enforcement efforts should, in turn, enhance the Commission's credibility as a law enforcement agency, encourage victims to come forward, and make the process of filing a charge less daunting. However, as a law enforcement agency, the Commission will vigorously enforce the statutes over which it has jurisdiction and will not hesitate to seek appropriate legal remedies through litigation when warranted.
(2)
Fairness
Any ADR enterprise developed and implemented by the EEOC must be fair to the participants. both in perception and reality. Fairness should be manifested throughout all Commission ADR proceedings by incorporating each of the core principles identified in this policy as well as by providing as much information about the ADR proceeding to the parties as soon as possible. Fairness requires that the Commission provide the opportunity for assistance during the proceeding to any party who is not represented. Fairness also requires that any Commission-sponsored program include the following elements:
Voluntariness
ADR programs developed by the Commission will be voluntary for the parties because the unique importance of the laws against employment discrimination requires that a federal forum always be available to an aggrieved individual. The Commission believes that parties must knowingly, willingly and voluntarily enter into an ADR proceeding. Likewise, the parties have the right to voluntarily opt out of a proceeding at any point prior to resolution for any reason, including the exercise of their right to file a lawsuit in federal district court. In no circumstances will a party be coerced into accepting the other party's offer to resolve a dispute. If the parties reach an agreement, the parties will be allowed to settle as long as the proposed agreement is lawful, enforceable, and both parties are informed of their rights and remedies under the applicable statutes.
Neutrality
Commission ADR proceedings will rely on a neutral third party to facilitate resolution of the dispute. ADR proceedings are most successful where a neutral or impartial third party, with no vested interest in the outcome of a dispute, allows the parties themselves to attempt to resolve their dispute. Neutrality will help maintain the integrity and effectiveness of the ADR program.
The facilitator's duty to the parties is to be neutral, honest, and to act in good faith. Those who act as neutrals under EEOC auspices should possess a thorough knowledge of EEO law, and must be trained in mediation theory and techniques.
(3)
Confidentiality
Maintaining confidentiality is an important component of any successful ADR program. Subject to the limited exceptions imposed by statute or regulation, confidentiality in any ADR proceeding must be maintained by the parties, EEOC employees who are involved in the ADR proceeding, and any outside neutral or other ADR staff. This will enable parties to ADR proceedings to be forthcoming and candid, without fear that frank statements may later be used against them. To accomplish this purpose, the Commission will be guided by the nondisclosure provisions of Title VII and the confidentiality provisions of ADRA which impose limitations on the disclosure of information. In order to encourage participation in a Commission sponsored ADR program, the Commission will include confidentiality provisions in all of its ADR programs or projects, and will notify the parties to the dispute of the protection offered by confidentiality provisions.
In order to ensure confidentiality, those who serve as neutrals for the Commission should be precluded from performing any investigatory or enforcement function related to charges with which they may have have been involved. The dispute resolution process must be insulated from the investigative and compliance process.
Enforceability
Any agreement reached during an ADR proceeding must be enforceable. An allegation that an ADR settlement agreement has been breached should be brought to the attention of the EEOC official responsible for that program function. The Commission will review and investigate the allegation and determine whether it will utilize its authority and resources to seek enforcement of the agreement.
Flexibility
The ADR program must be flexible enough to respond to the variety of challenges the Commission and its individual offices face. The Commission recognizes that there cannot be one ADR model which will work for all of its programs or all of its offices within the same program. Within the parameters set by the Commission, Commission staff should be able to adapt ADR techniques to fit specific program needs. Because offices operate in different cultures and milieus, and because the nature of the workload varies from office to office, Commission offices will need maximum flexibility in implementing an ADR program.
Training and Evaluation
Commission-sponsored ADR programs should include training and evaluation components. A successful ADR scheme requires that EEOC provide appropriate training and education on ADR to its own employees, the public, persons protected under the applicable laws, employers and neutrals. In addition, an evaluation component is essential to any ADR program in order to determine whether the program has achieved its goals, and how the program might be improved to be more efficient and achieve better results.
CONCLUSION
Through this Policy Statement, the Commission affirms its commitment to the use of ADR techniques throughout its programs, where appropriate and feasible, including charge processing, litigation, federal sector EEO complaint processing, internal EEO complaint processing, labor-management relations and contract administration.
1.
These procedures will continue to be governed by current standards except as specifically discussed in this document.
2.
The Commission remains cognizant that there are instances in which ADR may not be appropriate or feasible, such as in cases in which there is a need to establish policies or precedents, where resolution of a dispute would have a significant effect on non-parties, where a full public record is important, where the agency must maintain continuing jurisdiction over a matter, or where it would otherwise be inappropriate.
3.
The Commission will accept as sufficient such training as is generally recognized in the dispute resolution profession.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov