Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act (Elijah E. Cummings Act) of 2020 | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act (Elijah E. Cummings Act) of 2020
Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act (Elijah E. Cummings Act) of 2020
EDITOR’S NOTE: The following is the text of the Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act (Elijah E. Cummings Act) of 2020, which amends the
Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act (No FEAR Act) of 2002
(5 U.S.C. 2301 note). The Elijah E. Cummings Act appears as Subtitle B of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (2020).
Subtitle B—Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination
Act of 2020
SEC. 1131. SHORT TITLE.
This subtitle may be cited as the ‘‘Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act of 2020’’.
SEC. 1132. SENSE OF CONGRESS.
Section 102 of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended—
(1) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following:
‘‘(4) accountability in the enforcement of the rights of Federal employees is furthered when Federal agencies agree to take appropriate disciplinary action against Federal employees who are found to have intentionally committed discriminatory (including retaliatory) acts;’’; and
(2) in paragraph (5)(A)—
(A) by striking ‘‘nor is accountability’’ and inserting ‘‘accountability is not’’; and
(B) by inserting ‘‘for what, by law, the agency is responsible’’ after ‘‘under this Act’’.
SEC. 1133. NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
Section 202 of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(d) NOTIFICATION OF FINAL AGENCY ACTION—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL—Not later than 90 days after the date on which an event described in paragraph (2) occurs with respect to a finding of discrimination (including retaliation), the head of the Federal agency subject to the finding shall provide notice—
‘‘(A) on the public internet website of the agency, in a clear and prominent location linked directly from the home page of that website;
‘‘(B) stating that a finding of discrimination (including retaliation) has been made; and
‘‘(C) which shall remain posted for not less than 1 year.
‘‘(2) EVENTS DESCRIBED—An event described in this paragraph is any of the following:
‘‘(A) All appeals of a final action by a Federal agency involving a finding of discrimination (including retaliation) prohibited by a provision of law covered by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 201(a) have been exhausted.
‘‘(B) All appeals of a final decision by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission involving a finding of discrimination (including if the finding included a finding of retaliation) prohibited by a provision of law covered by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 201(a) have been exhausted.
‘‘(C) A court of jurisdiction issues a final judgment involving a finding of discrimination (including retaliation) prohibited by a provision of law covered by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 201(a).
‘‘(3) CONTENTS—A notification provided under paragraph (1) with respect to a finding of discrimination (including retaliation) shall—
‘‘(A) identify the date on which the finding was made, the date on which each discriminatory act occurred, and the law violated by each such discriminatory act; and
‘‘(B) advise Federal employees of the rights and protections available under the provisions of law covered by paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 201(a).’’.
SEC. 1134. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) ELECTRONIC FORMAT REQUIREMENT—
(1) IN GENERAL—Section 203(a) of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1)—
(A) by inserting ‘‘Homeland Security and’’ before ‘‘Governmental Affairs’’;
(B) by striking ‘‘on Government Reform’’ and inserting ‘‘on Oversight and Reform’’; and
(C) by inserting ‘‘(in an electronic format prescribed by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management),’’ after ‘‘an annual report’’.
(2) EFFECTIVE DATE—The amendment made by paragraph (1)(C) shall take effect on the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
(3) TRANSITION PERIOD—Notwithstanding the requirements of section 203(a) of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note), the report required under such section 203(a) may be submitted in an electronic format, as prescribed by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, during the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act
and ending on the effective date in paragraph (2).
(b) REPORTING REQUIREMENT FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION—Section 203 of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended
by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(c) DISCIPLINARY ACTION REPORT—Not later than 120 days after the date on which a Federal agency takes final action, or a Federal agency receives a final decision issued by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, involving a finding of discrimination (including retaliation) in violation of a provision of law covered by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 201(a), as applicable, the applicable Federal agency shall submit to the Commission a report stating—
‘‘(1) whether disciplinary action has been proposed against a Federal employee as a result of the violation; and
‘‘(2) the reasons for any disciplinary action proposed under paragraph (1).’’.
SEC. 1135. DATA TO BE POSTED BY EMPLOYING FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Section 301(b) of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (9)—
(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end;
(B) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘, and’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(C) with respect to each finding described in subparagraph
(A)—
‘‘(i) the date of the finding,
‘‘(ii) the affected Federal agency,
‘‘(iii) the law violated, and
‘‘(iv) whether a decision has been made regarding disciplinary action as a result of the finding.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(11) Data regarding each class action complaint filed against the agency alleging discrimination (including retaliation), including—
‘‘(A) information regarding the date on which each complaint was filed,
‘‘(B) a general summary of the allegations alleged in the complaint,
‘‘(C) an estimate of the total number of plaintiffs joined in the complaint, if known,
‘‘(D) the current status of the complaint, including whether the class has been certified, and
‘‘(E) the case numbers for the civil actions in which discrimination (including retaliation) has been found.’’.
SEC. 1136. DATA TO BE POSTED BY THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION.
Section 302(b) of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended by striking ‘‘(10)’’ and inserting ‘‘(11)’’.
SEC. 1137. NOTIFICATION AND FEDERAL EMPLOYEE ANTIDISCRIMINATION
AND RETALIATION ACT OF 2002 AMENDMENTS.
(a) NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS—Title II of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended by adding at the end the following:
‘‘SEC. 207. COMPLAINT TRACKING.
‘‘Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act of 2020, each Federal agency shall establish a system to track each complaint of discrimination arising under section 2302(b)(1) of title 5, United States Code, and adjudicated through the Equal Employment Opportunity process from the filing of a complaint with the Federal agency to resolution of the complaint, including whether a decision has been made regarding disciplinary action as the result of a finding of discrimination.
‘‘SEC. 208. NOTATION IN PERSONNEL RECORD.
‘‘If a Federal agency takes an adverse action covered under section 7512 of title 5, United States Code, against a Federal employee for an act of discrimination (including retaliation) prohibited by a provision of law covered by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 201(a), the agency shall, after all appeals relating to that action have been exhausted, include a notation of the adverse action and the reason for the action in the personnel record of the employee.’’.
(b) PROCESSING AND REFERRAL—The Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended by adding at the end the following:
TITLE IV—PROCESSING AND REFERRAL
‘‘SEC. 401. PROCESSING AND RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS.
‘‘Each Federal agency shall—
‘‘(1) be responsible for the fair and impartial processing and resolution of complaints of employment discrimination (including retaliation) prohibited by a provision of law covered by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 201(a); and
‘‘(2) establish a model Equal Employment Opportunity Program that—
‘‘(A) is not under the control, either structurally or practically, of the agency’s Office of Human Capital or Office of the General Counsel (or the equivalent);
‘‘(B) is devoid of internal conflicts of interest and ensures fairness and inclusiveness within the agency; and
‘‘(C) ensures the efficient and fair resolution of complaints alleging discrimination (including retaliation).
‘‘SEC. 402. NO LIMITATION ON ADVICE OR COUNSEL.
‘‘Nothing in this title shall prevent a Federal agency or a subcomponent of a Federal agency, or the Department of Justice, from providing advice or counsel to employees of that agency (or subcomponent, as applicable) in the resolution of a complaint.
‘‘SEC. 403. HEAD OF PROGRAM SUPERVISED BY HEAD OF AGENCY.
‘‘The head of each Federal agency’s Equal Employment Opportunity Program shall report directly to the head of the agency.
‘‘SEC. 404. REFERRALS OF FINDINGS OF DISCRIMINATION.
‘‘(a) EEOC FINDINGS OF DISCRIMINATION—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 30 days after the date on which the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (referred to in this section as the ‘Commission’) receives, or should have received, a Federal agency report required under section 203(c), the Commission may refer the matter to which the report relates to the Office of Special Counsel if the Commission determines that the Federal agency did not take appropriate action with respect to the finding that is the subject of the report.
‘‘(2) NOTIFICATIONS—The Commission shall—
‘‘(A) notify the applicable Federal agency if the Commission refers a matter to the Office of Special Counsel under paragraph (1); and
‘‘(B) with respect to a fiscal year, include in the Annual Report of the Federal Workforce of the Commission covering that fiscal year—
‘‘(i) the number of referrals made under paragraph (1) during that fiscal year; and
‘‘(ii) a brief summary of each referral described in clause (i).
‘‘(b) REFERRALS TO SPECIAL COUNSEL—The Office of Special Counsel shall accept and review a referral from the Commission under subsection (a)(1) for purposes of pursuing disciplinary action under the authority of the Office against a Federal employee who commits an act of discrimination (including retaliation).
‘(c) NOTIFICATION—The Office of Special Counsel shall notify the Commission and the applicable Federal agency in a case in which—
‘‘(1) the Office of Special Counsel pursues disciplinary action under subsection (b); and
‘‘(2) the Federal agency imposes some form of disciplinary action against a Federal employee who commits an act of discrimination (including retaliation).
‘‘(d) SPECIAL COUNSEL APPROVAL—A Federal agency may not take disciplinary action against a Federal employee for an alleged act of discrimination (including retaliation) referred by the Commission under this section, except in accordance with the requirements of section 1214(f) of title 5, United States Code.’’.
(c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS—The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (5 U.S.C. 2301 note) is amended—
(1) by inserting after the item relating to section 206 the following:
‘‘Sec. 207. Complaint tracking.
‘‘Sec. 208. Notation in personnel record.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘TITLE IV—PROCESSING AND REFERRAL
‘‘Sec. 401. Processing and resolution of complaints.
‘‘Sec. 402. No limitation on advice or counsel.
‘‘Sec. 403. Head of Program supervised by head of agency.
‘‘Sec. 404. Referrals of findings of discrimination.’’.
SEC. 1138. NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENT LIMITATION.
Section 2302(b)(13) of title 5, United States Code, is amended—
(1) by striking ‘‘agreement does not’’ and inserting the following: ‘‘agreement—
‘‘(A) does not’’;
(2) in subparagraph (A), as so designated, by inserting ‘‘or the Office of Special Counsel’’ after ‘‘Inspector General’’; and
(3) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(B) prohibits or restricts an employee or applicant for employment from disclosing to Congress, the Special Counsel, the Inspector General of an agency, or any other agency component responsible for internal investigation or review any information that relates to any violation of any law, rule, or regulation, or mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety, or any other whistleblower protection; or’’.
Enabled In-page Navigation
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov