Enforcement Guidance: Preemployment Disability-Related Questions and Medical Examinations | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Enforcement Guidance: Preemployment Disability-Related Questions and Medical Examinations
Enforcement Guidance:  Preemployment Disability-Related Questions and Medical Examinations
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1995-3
Concise Display Name
Enforcement Guidance:  Preemployment Disability-Related Questions and Medical Examinations
Issue Date
10-10-1995
General Topics
Disability
Summary
This document addresses when it is permissible under Title I of the ADA for employers to make disability-related inquiries or require medical examinations of applicants.
Citation
ADA, Rehabilitation Act, 29 CFR Part 1630, 29 CFR Part 1614
Document Applicant
Employers, Employees, Applicants, Attorneys and Practitioners, EEOC Staff
Previous Revision
Yes.  Replaced "Enforcement Guidance on Pre-Employment Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations Under the ADA", dated May 19, 1994
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
Notice Concerning The Americans With Disabilities Act Amendments Act Of 2008
This document was issued prior to enactment of the
Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA)
, which took effect on January 1, 2009.  The ADAAA broadened the statutory definition of disability, as summarized in this
list of specific changes.
EEOC NOTICE
Number 915.002
Date 10/10/95
1.  SUBJECT:  Enforcement Guidance: Preemployment Disability-
Related Questions and Medical Examinations.
2.  PURPOSE: This document provides the EEOC's position under the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, on preemployment
disability-related questions and medical examinations.
3.  EFFECTIVE DATE: Upon receipt.
4.  EXPIRATION DATE: As an exception to EEOC Order 205.001,
Appendix B, Attachment 4, § a(5), this Notice will remain in
effect until rescinded or superseded.
5.  ORIGINATOR: ADA Division, Office of Legal Counsel.
6.  INSTRUCTIONS: File after Section 902 of Volume II of the
Compliance Manual.
_______________________            ___________________________
Date                               Gilbert F. Casellas
Chairman
ADA Enforcement Guidance: Preemployment Disability-Related
Questions and Medical Examinations
Introduction
Under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (the "ADA"),1 an
employer may ask disability-related questions and require medical
examinations of an applicant only after the applicant has been
given a conditional job offer.  This Enforcement Guidance explains
these ADA provisions.2
Background
In the past, some employment applications and interviews requested
information about an applicant's physical and/or mental condition.
This information was often used to exclude applicants with
disabilities before their ability to perform the job was even
evaluated.
For example, applicants may have been asked about their medical
conditions at the same time that they were engaging in other parts
of the application process, such as completing a written job
application or having references checked.  If an applicant was
then rejected, s/he did not necessarily know whether s/he was
rejected because of disability, or because of insufficient skills
or experience or a bad report from a reference.
As a result, Congress established a process within the ADA to
isolate an employer's consideration of an applicant's non-medical
qualifications from any consideration of the applicant's medical
condition.
The Statutory and Regulatory Framework
Under the law, an employer may not ask disability-related
questions and may not conduct medical examinations until after it
makes a conditional job offer to the applicant.3  This helps
ensure that an applicant's possible hidden disability (including a
prior history of a disability) is not considered before the
employer evaluates an applicant's non-medical qualifications.  An
employer may not ask disability-related questions or require a
medical examination pre-offer even if it intends to look at the
answers or results only at the post-offer stage.
Although employers may not ask disability-related questions or
require medical examinations at the pre-offer stage, they may do a
wide variety of things to evaluate whether an applicant is
qualified for the job, including the following:
* Employers may ask about an applicant's ability to perform
specific job functions.  For example, an employer may state the
physical requirements of a job (such as the ability to lift a
certain amount of weight, or the ability to climb ladders), and
ask if an applicant can satisfy these requirements.
* Employers may ask about an applicant's non-medical
qualifications and skills, such as the applicant's education, work
history, and required certifications and licenses.
* Employers may ask applicants to describe or demonstrate how they
would perform job tasks.
Once a conditional job offer is made, the employer may ask
disability-related questions and require medical examinations as
long as this is done for all entering employees in that job
category.  If the employer rejects the applicant after a
disability-related question or medical examination, investigators
will closely scrutinize whether the rejection was based on the
results of that question or examination.
If the question or examination screens out an individual because
of a disability, the employer must demonstrate that the reason for
the rejection is "job-related and consistent with business
necessity."4
In addition, if the individual is screened out for safety reasons,
the employer must demonstrate that the individual poses a "direct
threat."  This means that the individual poses a significant risk
of substantial harm to him/herself or others, and that the risk
cannot be reduced below the direct threat level through reasonable
accommodation.5
Medical information must be kept confidential.6  The ADA contains
narrow exceptions for disclosing specific, limited information to
supervisors and managers, first aid and safety personnel, and
government officials investigating compliance with the ADA.
Employers may also disclose medical information to state workers'
compensation offices, state second injury funds, or workers'
compensation insurance carriers in accordance with state workers'
compensation laws7 and may use the medical information for
insurance purposes.8
The Pre-Offer Stage
What is a Disability-Related Question?
Definition: "Disability-Related Question" means a question that is
likely to elicit information about a disability.
At the pre-offer stage, an employer cannot ask questions that are
likely to elicit information about a disability.  This includes
directly asking whether an applicant has a particular disability.
It also means that an employer cannot ask questions that are
closely related to disability.9
On the other hand, if there are many possible answers to a
question and only some of those answers would contain disability-
related information, that question is not "disability-related."10
Below are some commonly asked questions about this area of the
law.
* May an employer ask whether an applicant can perform the job?
Yes.  An employer may ask whether applicants can perform any or
all job functions, including whether applicants can perform job
functions "with or without reasonable accommodation."11
* May an employer ask applicants to describe or demonstrate how
they would perform the job (including any needed reasonable
accommodations)?
Yes. An employer may ask applicants to describe how they would
perform any or all job functions, as long as all applicants in the
job category are asked to do this.
Employers should remember that, if an applicant says that s/he
will need a reasonable accommodation to do a job demonstration,
the employer must either:
* provide a reasonable accommodation that does not create an undue
hardship; or
* allow the applicant to simply describe how s/he would perform
the job function.
* May an employer ask a particular applicant to describe or
demonstrate how s/he would perform the job, if other applicants
aren't asked to do this?
When an employer could reasonably believe that an applicant will
not be able to perform a job function because of a known
disability, the employer may ask that particular applicant to
describe or demonstrate how s/he would perform the function.  An
applicant's disability would be a "known disability" either
because it is obvious (for example, the applicant uses a
wheelchair), or because the applicant has voluntarily disclosed
that s/he has a hidden disability.
*
May an employer ask applicants whether they will need reasonable
accommodation for the hiring process?
Yes.  An employer may tell applicants what the hiring process
involves (for example, an interview, timed written test, or job
demonstration), and may ask applicants whether they will need a
reasonable accommodation for this process.
* May an employer ask an applicant for documentation of his/her
disability when the applicant requests reasonable accommodation
for the hiring process?
Yes.  If the need for accommodation is not obvious, an employer
may ask an applicant for reasonable documentation about his/her
disability if the applicant requests reasonable accommodation for
the hiring process (such as a request for the employer to reformat
an examination, or a request for an accommodation in connection
with a job demonstration).  The employer is entitled to know that
the applicant has a covered disability and that s/he needs an
accommodation.
So, the applicant may be required to provide documentation from an
appropriate professional, such as a doctor or a rehabilitation
counselor, concerning the applicant's disability and functional
limitations.
*
May an employer ask applicants whether they will need reasonable
accommodation to perform the functions of the job?
In general, an employer may not ask questions on an application or
in an interview about whether an applicant will need reasonable
accommodation for a job.  This is because these questions are
likely to elicit whether the applicant has a disability
(generally, only people who have disabilities will need reasonable
accommodations).
Example:  An employment application may not ask, "Do you need
reasonable accommodation to perform this job?"
Example:  An employment application may not ask, "Can you do these
functions with ___ without ___ reasonable accommodation? (Check
One)"
Example:  An applicant with no known disability is being
interviewed for a job.  He has not asked for any reasonable
accommodation, either for the application process or for the job.
The employer may not ask him, "Will you need reasonable
accommodation to perform this job?"
However, when an employer could reasonably believe that an
applicant will need reasonable accommodation to perform the
functions of the job, the employer may ask that applicant certain
limited questions.  Specifically, the employer may ask whether
s/he needs reasonable accommodation and what type of reasonable
accommodation would be needed to perform the functions of the
job.12  The employer could ask these questions if:
* the employer reasonably believes the applicant will need
reasonable accommodation because of an obvious disability;
* the employer reasonably believes the applicant will need
reasonable accommodation because of a hidden disability that the
applicant has voluntarily disclosed to the employer; or
* an applicant has voluntarily disclosed to the employer that s/he
needs reasonable accommodation to perform the job.
Example:  An individual with diabetes applying for a receptionist
position voluntarily discloses that she will need periodic breaks
to take medication.  The employer may ask the applicant questions
about the reasonable accommodation such as how often she will need
breaks, and how long the breaks must be.  Of course, the employer
may not ask any questions about the underlying physical condition.
Example: An applicant with a severe visual impairment applies for
a job involving computer work.  The employer may ask whether he
will need reasonable accommodation to perform the functions of the
job.  If the applicant answers "no," the employer may not ask
additional questions about reasonable accommodation (although, of
course, the employer could ask the applicant to describe or
demonstrate performance).  If the applicant says that he will need
accommodation, the employer may ask questions about the type of
required accommodation such as, "What will you need?"  If the
applicant says he needs software that increases the size of text
on the computer screen, the employer may ask questions such as,
"Who makes that software?" "Do you need a particular brand?" or
"Is that software compatible with our computers?"  However, the
employer may not ask questions about the applicant's underlying
condition.  In addition, the employer may not ask reasonable
accommodation questions that are unrelated to job functions such
as, "Will you need reasonable accommodation to get to the
cafeteria?"
An employer may only ask about reasonable accommodation that is
needed now or in the near future.  An applicant is not required to
disclose reasonable accommodations that may be needed in the more
distant future.
* May an employer ask whether an applicant can meet the employer's
attendance requirements?
Yes.  An employer may state its attendance requirements and ask
whether an applicant can meet them.  An employer also may ask
about an applicant's prior attendance record (for example, how
many days the applicant was absent from his/her last job).  These
questions are not likely to elicit information about a disability
because there may be many reasons unrelated to disability why
someone cannot meet attendance requirements or was frequently
absent from a previous job (for example, an applicant may have had
day-care problems).
An employer also may ask questions designed to detect whether an
applicant abused his/her leave because these questions are not
likely to elicit information about a disability.
Example:  An employer may ask an applicant, "How many Mondays or
Fridays were you absent last year on leave other than approved
vacation leave?"
However, at the pre-offer stage, an employer may not ask how many
days an applicant was sick, because these questions relate
directly to the severity of an individual's impairments.
Therefore, these questions are likely to elicit information about
a disability.
* May an employer ask applicants about their certifications and
licenses?
Yes.  An employer may ask an applicant at the pre-offer stage
whether s/he has certifications or licenses required for any job
duties.  An employer also may ask an applicant whether s/he
intends to get a particular job-related certification or license,
or why s/he does not have the certification or license.  These
questions are not likely to elicit information about an
applicant's disability because there may be a number of reasons
unrelated to disability why someone does not have -- or does not
intend to get -- a certification/license.
* May an employer ask applicants about their arrest or conviction
records?
Yes.  Questions about an applicant's arrest or conviction records
are not likely to elicit information about disability because
there are many reasons unrelated to disability why someone may
have an arrest/conviction record.13
* May an employer ask questions about an applicant's impairments?
Yes, if the particular question is not likely to elicit
information about whether the applicant has a disability.  It is
important to remember that not all impairments will be
disabilities; an impairment is a disability only if it
substantially limits a major life activity.  So, an employer may
ask an applicant with a broken leg how she broke her leg.  Since a
broken leg normally is a temporary condition which does not rise
to the level of a disability, this question is not likely to
disclose whether the applicant has a disability.  But, such
questions as "Do you expect the leg to heal normally?" or "Do you
break bones easily?" would be disability-related.  Certainly, an
employer may not ask a broad question about impairments that is
likely to elicit information about disability, such as, "What
impairments do you have?"
* May an employer ask whether applicants can perform major life
activities, such as standing, lifting, walking, etc.?
Questions about whether an applicant can perform major life
activities are almost always disability-related because they are
likely to elicit information about a disability.  For example, if
an applicant cannot stand or walk, it is likely to be a result of
a disability.  So, these questions are prohibited at the pre-offer
stage unless they are specifically about the ability to perform
job functions.
* May an employer ask applicants about their workers' compensation
history?
No.  An employer may not ask applicants about job-related injuries
or workers' compensation history.  These questions relate directly
to the severity of an applicant's impairments.  Therefore, these
questions are likely to elicit information about disability.
* May an employer ask applicants about their current illegal use
of drugs?
Yes.  An employer may ask applicants about current illegal use of
drugs14 because an individual who currently illegally uses drugs
is not protected under the ADA (when the employer acts on the
basis of the drug use).15
* May an employer ask applicants about their lawful drug use?
No, if the question is likely to elicit information about
disability.  Employers should know that many questions about
current or prior lawful drug use are likely to elicit information
about a disability, and are therefore impermissible at the pre-
offer stage.  For example, questions like, "What medications are
you currently taking?" or "Have you ever taken AZT?" certainly
elicit information about whether an applicant has a disability.
However, some innocuous questions about lawful drug use are not
likely to elicit information about disability.
Example:  During her interview, an applicant volunteers to the
interviewer that she is coughing and wheezing because her
allergies are acting up as a result of pollen in the air.  The
interviewer, who also has allergies, tells the applicant that he
finds "Lemebreathe" (an over-the-counter antihistamine) to be
effective, and asks the applicant if she has tried it.  There are
many reasons why someone might have tried "Lemebreathe" which have
nothing to do with disability.  Therefore, this question is not
likely to elicit information about a disability.
* May an employer ask applicants about their lawful drug use if
the employer is administering a test for illegal use of drugs?
Yes, if an applicant tests positive for illegal drug use.  In that
case, the employer may validate the test results by asking about
lawful drug use or possible explanations for the positive result
other than the illegal use of drugs.
Example:  If an applicant tests positive for use of a controlled
substance, the employer may lawfully ask questions such as, "What
medications have you taken that might have resulted in this
positive test result?  Are you taking this medication under a
lawful prescription?"
* May an employer ask applicants about their prior illegal drug
use?
Yes, provided that the particular question is not likely to elicit
information about a disability.  It is important to remember that
past addiction to illegal drugs or controlled substances is a
covered disability under the ADA (as long as the person is not a
current illegal drug user), but past casual use is not a covered
disability.  Therefore, the question is fine as long as it does
not go to past drug addiction.
Example:  An employer may ask, "Have you ever used illegal drugs?"
"When is the last time you used illegal drugs?" or "Have you used
illegal drugs in the last six months?"  These questions are not
likely to tell the employer anything about whether the applicant
was addicted to drugs.
However, questions that ask how much the applicant used drugs in
the past are likely to elicit information about whether the
applicant was a past drug addict.  These questions are therefore
impermissible at the pre-offer stage.
Example:  At the pre-offer stage, an employer may not ask an
applicant questions such as, "How often did you use illegal drugs
in the past?" "Have you ever been addicted to drugs?" "Have you
ever been treated for drug addiction?" or "Have you ever been
treated for drug abuse?"
* May an employer ask applicants about their drinking habits?
Yes, unless the particular question is likely to elicit
information about alcoholism, which is a disability.  An employer
may ask an applicant whether s/he drinks alcohol, or whether s/he
has been arrested for driving under the influence because these
questions do not reveal whether someone has alcoholism.  However,
questions asking how much alcohol an applicant drinks or whether
s/he has participated in an alcohol rehabilitation program are
likely to elicit information about whether the applicant has
alcoholism.
*
May an employer ask applicants to "self-identify" as individuals
with disabilities for purposes of the employer's affirmative
action program?
Yes.  An employer may invite applicants to voluntarily self-
identify for purposes of the employer's affirmative action program
if:
* the employer is undertaking affirmative action because of a
federal, state, or local law (including a veterans' preference
law) that requires affirmative action for individuals with
disabilities (that is, the law requires some action to be taken on
behalf of such individuals); or
* the employer is voluntarily using the information to benefit
individuals with disabilities.
Employers should remember that state or local laws sometimes
permit or encourage affirmative action.  In those cases, an
employer may invite voluntary self-identification only if the
employer uses the information to benefit individuals with
disabilities.
* Are there any special steps an employer should take if it asks
applicants to "self-identify" for purposes of the employer's
affirmative action program?
Yes.  If the employer invites applicants to voluntarily self-
identify in connection with providing affirmative action, the
employer must do the following:
* state clearly on any written questionnaire, or state clearly
orally (if no written questionnaire is used), that the information
requested is used solely in connection with its affirmative action
obligations or efforts; and
* state clearly that the information is being requested on a
voluntary basis, that it will be kept confidential in accordance
with the ADA, that refusal to provide it will not subject the
applicant to any adverse treatment, and that it will be used only
in accordance with the ADA.
In order to ensure that the self-identification information is
kept confidential, the information must be on a form that is kept
separate from the application.
* May an employer ask third parties questions it could not ask the
applicant directly?
No.  An employer may not ask a third party (such as a service that
provides information about workers' compensation claims, a state
agency, or an applicant's friends, family, or former employers)
any questions that it could not directly ask the applicant.
What is a Medical Examination?
Definition:  A "Medical Examination" is a procedure or test that
seeks information about an individual's physical or mental
impairments or health.
At the pre-offer stage, an employer cannot require examinations
that seek information about physical or mental impairments or
health.  It is not always easy to determine whether something is a
medical examination.  The following factors are helpful in
determining whether a procedure or test is medical:
*     Is it administered by a health care professional or someone
trained by a health care professional?
*     Are the results interpreted by a health care professional or
someone trained by a health care professional?
*     Is it designed to reveal an impairment or physical or mental
health?
*     Is the employer trying to determine the applicant's physical
or mental health or impairments?
*     Is it invasive (for example, does it require the drawing of
blood, urine or breath)?
*     Does it measure an applicant's performance of a task, or does
it measure the applicant's physiological responses to performing
the task?
*     Is it normally given in a medical setting (for example, a
health care professional's office)?
*     Is medical equipment used?
In many cases, a combination of factors will be relevant in
figuring out whether a procedure or test is a medical examination.
In some cases, one factor may be enough to determine that a
procedure or test is medical.
Example:  An employer requires applicants to lift a thirty pound
box and carry it twenty feet.  This is not a medical examination;
it is just a test of whether the applicant can perform this task.
But, if the employer takes the applicant's blood pressure or heart
rate after the lifting and carrying, the test would be a medical
examination because it is measuring the applicant's physiological
response to lifting and carrying, as opposed to the applicant's
ability to lift and carry.
Example:  A psychological test is designed to reveal mental
illness, but a particular employer says it does not give the test
to disclose mental illness (for example, the employer says it uses
the test to disclose just tastes and habits).  But, the test also
is interpreted by a psychologist, and is routinely used in a
clinical setting to provide evidence that would lead to a
diagnosis of a mental disorder or impairment (for example, whether
an applicant has paranoid tendencies, or is depressed).  Under
these facts, this test is a medical examination.
Below are some commonly asked questions about the ADA's
restrictions on pre-offer medical examinations.
* May an employer require applicants to take physical agility
tests?
Yes.  A physical agility test, in which an applicant demonstrates
the ability to perform actual or simulated job tasks, is not a
medical examination under the ADA.16
Example:  A police department tests police officer applicants'
ability to run through an obstacle course designed to simulate a
suspect chase in an urban setting.  This is not a medical
examination.
* May an employer require applicants to take physical fitness
tests?
Yes.  A physical fitness test, in which an applicant's performance
of physical tasks -- such as running or lifting -- is measured, is
not a medical examination.17
However, if an employer measures an applicant's physiological or
biological responses to performance, the test would be medical.
Example:  A messenger service tests applicants' ability to run one
mile in 15 minutes.  At the end of the run, the employer takes the
applicants' blood pressure and heart rate.  Measuring the
applicant's physiological responses makes this a medical
examination.
* May an employer ask an applicant to provide medical
certification that s/he can safely perform a physical agility or
physical fitness test?
Yes.  Although an employer cannot ask disability-related
questions, it may give the applicant a description of the agility
or fitness test and ask the applicant to have a private physician
simply state whether s/he can safely perform the test.
* May an employer ask an applicant to assume liability for
injuries incurred in performing a physical agility or physical
fitness test?
Yes.  An employer may ask an applicant to assume responsibility
and release the employer of liability for injuries incurred in
performing a physical agility or fitness test.
* May an employer give psychological examinations to applicants?
Yes, unless the particular examination is medical.  This
determination would be based on some of the factors listed above,
such as the purpose of the test and the intent of the employer in
giving the test.  Psychological examinations are medical if they
provide evidence that would lead to identifying a mental disorder
or impairment (for example, those listed in the American
Psychiatric Association's most recent Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)).
Example:  An employer gives applicants the RUOK Test
(hypothetical), an examination which reflects whether applicants
have characteristics that lead to identifying whether the
individual has excessive anxiety, depression, and certain
compulsive disorders (DSM-listed conditions).  This test is
medical.
On the other hand, if a test is designed and used to measure only
things such as honesty, tastes, and habits, it is not medical.
Example:  An employer gives the IFIB Personality Test
(hypothetical), an examination designed and used to reflect only
whether an applicant is likely to lie.  This test, as used by the
employer, is not a medical examination.
* May an employer give polygraph examinations to applicants?
Although most employers are prohibited by federal and state laws
from giving polygraph examinations, some employers are not
prohibited from giving these examinations.  Under the ADA,
polygraph examinations are not medical examinations.18  Many
times, however, polygraph examinations contain disability-related
questions, such as questions about what lawful medications the
applicant is taking.  Employers cannot ask disability-related
questions as part of a pre-offer examination, even if the
examination is not itself "medical."
* May an employer give vision tests to applicants?
Yes, unless the particular test is medical.  Evaluating someone's
ability to read labels or distinguish objects as part of a
demonstration of the person's ability to do the job is not a
medical examination.  However, an ophthalmologist's or
optometrist's analysis of someone's vision is medical.  Similarly,
requiring an individual to read an eye chart would be a medical
examination.
* May an employer give applicants tests to determine illegal use
of controlled substances?
Yes.  The ADA specifically states that, for purposes of the ADA,
tests to determine the current illegal use of controlled
substances are not considered medical examinations.
* May an employer give alcohol tests to applicants?
No.  Tests to determine whether and/or how much alcohol an
individual has consumed are medical, and there is no statutory
exemption.
The Post-Offer Stage
After giving a job offer to an applicant, an employer may ask
disability-related questions and perform medical examinations.
The job offer may be conditioned on the results of post-offer
disability-related questions or medical examinations.
At the "post-offer" stage, an employer may ask about an
individual's workers' compensation history, prior sick leave
usage, illnesses/diseases/impairments, and general physical and
mental health.  Disability-related questions and medical
examinations at the post-offer stage do not have to be related to
the job.19
If an employer asks post-offer disability-related questions, or
requires post-offer medical examinations, it must make sure that
it follows certain procedures:
* all entering employees in the same job category must be
subjected to the examination/inquiry, regardless of disability;20
and
* medical information obtained must be kept confidential.21
Below are some commonly asked questions about the post-offer
stage.
* What is considered a real job offer?
Since an employer can ask disability-related questions and require
medical examinations after a job offer, it is important that the
job offer be real.  A job offer is real if the employer has
evaluated all relevant non-medical information which it reasonably
could have obtained and analyzed prior to giving the offer.  Of
course, there are times when an employer cannot reasonably obtain
and evaluate all non-medical information at the pre-offer stage.
If an employer can show that is the case, the offer would still be
considered a real offer.
Example:  It may be too costly for a law enforcement employer
wishing to administer a polygraph examination to administer a pre-
offer examination asking non-disability-related questions, and a
post-offer examination asking disability-related questions.  In
this case, the employer may be able to demonstrate that it could
not reasonably obtain and evaluate the non-medical polygraph
information at the pre-offer stage.
Example:  An applicant might state that his current employer
should not be asked for a reference check until the potential
employer makes a conditional job offer.  In this case, the
potential employer could not reasonably obtain and evaluate the
non-medical information from the reference at the pre-offer stage.
* Do offers have to be limited to current vacancies?
No.  An employer may give offers to fill current vacancies or
reasonably anticipated openings.
* May an employer give offers that exceed the number of vacancies
or reasonably anticipated openings?
Yes.  The offers will still be considered real if the employer can
demonstrate that it needs to give more offers in order to actually
fill vacancies or reasonably anticipated openings.  For example,
an employer may demonstrate that a certain percentage of the
offerees will likely be disqualified or will withdraw from the
pool.
Example:  A police department may be able to demonstrate that it
needs to make offers to 50 applicants for 25 available positions
because about half of the offers will likely be revoked based on
post-offer medical tests and/or security checks, and because some
applicants may voluntarily withdraw from consideration.
Of course, an employer must comply with the ADA when taking people
out of the pool to fill actual vacancies.  The employer must
notify an individual (orally or in writing) if his/her placement
into an actual vacancy is in any way adversely affected by the
results of a post-offer medical examination or disability-related
question.
If an individual alleges that disability has affected his/her
placement into an actual vacancy, the EEOC will carefully
scrutinize whether disability was a reason for any adverse action.
If disability was a reason, the EEOC will determine whether the
action was job-related and consistent with business necessity.
* After an employer has obtained basic medical information from
all individuals who have been given conditional offers in a job
category, may it ask specific individuals for more medical
information?
Yes, if the follow-up examinations or questions are medically
related to the previously obtained medical information.22
Example:  At the post-offer stage, an employer asks new hires
whether they have had back injuries, and learns that some of the
individuals have had such injuries.  The employer may give medical
examinations designed to diagnose back impairments to persons who
stated that they had prior back injuries, as long as these
examinations are medically related to those injuries.
* At the post-offer stage, may an employer ask all individuals
whether they need reasonable accommodation to perform the job?
Yes.
* If, at the post-offer stage, someone requests reasonable
accommodation to perform the job, may the employer ask him/her for
documentation of his/her disability?
Yes.  If someone requests reasonable accommodation so s/he will be
able to perform a job and the need for the accommodation is not
obvious, the employer may require reasonable documentation of the
individual's entitlement to reasonable accommodation.  So, the
employer may require documentation showing that the individual has
a covered disability, and stating his/her functional limitations.
Example:  An entering employee states that she will need a 15-
minute break every two hours to eat a snack in order to maintain
her blood sugar level.  The employer may ask her to provide
documentation from her doctor showing that: (1) she has an
impairment that substantially limits a major life activity; and
(2) she actually needs the requested breaks because of the
impairment.
Confidentiality
An employer must keep any medical information on applicants or
employees confidential, with the following limited exceptions:
* supervisors and managers may be told about necessary
restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and about
necessary accommodations;
* first aid and safety personnel may be told if the disability
might require emergency treatment;
* government officials investigating compliance with the ADA must
be given relevant information on request;23
* employers may give information to state workers' compensation
offices, state second injury funds or workers' compensation
insurance carriers in accordance with state workers' compensation
laws;24 and
* employers may use the information for insurance purposes.25
Below are some commonly asked questions about the ADA's
confidentiality requirements.
* May medical information be given to decision-makers involved in
the hiring process?
Yes.  Medical information may be given to -- and used by --
appropriate decision-makers involved in the hiring process so they
can make employment decisions consistent with the ADA.  In
addition, the employer may use the information to determine
reasonable accommodations for the individual.  For example, the
employer may share the information with a third party, such as a
health care professional, to determine whether a reasonable
accommodation is possible for a particular individual.  The
information certainly must be kept confidential.
Of course, the employer may only share the medical information
with individuals involved in the hiring process (or in
implementing an affirmative action program) who need to know the
information.  For example, in some cases, a number of people may
be involved in evaluating an applicant.  Some individuals may
simply be responsible for evaluating an applicant's references;
these individuals may have no need to know an applicant's medical
condition and therefore should not have access to the medical
information.
* Can an individual voluntarily disclose his/her own medical
information to persons beyond those to whom an employer can
disclose such information?
Yes, as long as it's really voluntary.  The employer cannot
request, persuade, coerce, or otherwise pressure the individual to
get him/her to disclose medical information.
* Does the employer's confidentiality obligation extend to medical
information that an individual voluntarily tells the employer?
Yes.  For example, if an applicant voluntarily discloses bipolar
disorder and the need for reasonable accommodation, the employer
may not disclose the condition or the applicant's need for
accommodation to the applicant's references.
* Can medical information be kept in an employee's regular
personnel file?
No.  Medical information must be collected and maintained on
separate forms and in separate medical files.26  An employer
should not place any medical-related material in an employee's
non-medical personnel file.  If an employer wants to put a
document in a personnel file, and that document happens to contain
some medical information, the employer must simply remove the
medical information from the document before putting it in the
personnel file.
* Does the confidentiality obligation end when the person is no
longer an applicant or employee?
No, an employer must keep medical information confidential even if
someone is no longer an applicant (for example, s/he wasn't hired)
or is no longer an employee.
* Is an employer required to remove from its personnel files
medical information obtained before the ADA's effective date?
No.
NOTE: Index removed in ASCII version
1. Codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-17,
12201-13 (Supp. V 1994).
2. The analysis in this guidance also applies to federal
sector complaints of non-affirmative action employment
discrimination arising under section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973.  29 U.S.C.A. § 791(g) (West Supp. 1994).  In
addition, the analysis applies to complaints of non-affirmative
action employment discrimination arising under section 503 and
employment discrimination under section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act.  29 U.S.C.A. §§ 793(d), 794(d) (West Supp. 1994).
3. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(2); 29 C.F.R. §§
1630.13(a), 1630.14(a),(b).
4. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b); 29 C.F.R. §§
1630.10, 1630.14(b)(3).
5. 42 U.S.C. § 12113(b); See 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app.
§ 1630.2(r).
6. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(b)(1)(i-iii).
7. See 42 U.S.C. § 12201(b); 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. §
1630.14(b).
8. See 42 U.S.C. § 12201(c); 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. §
1630.14(b).  For example, an employer may submit medical
information to the company's health insurance carrier if the
information is needed to administer a health insurance plan in
accordance with § 501(c) of the ADA.
9. Of course, an employer can always ask about an applicant's
ability to perform the job.
10. Sometimes, applicants disclose disability-related information
in responding to an otherwise lawful pre-offer question.  Although
the employer has not asked an unlawful question, it still cannot
refuse to hire an applicant based on disability unless the reason
is "job-related and consistent with business necessity."
11. However, an employer cannot ask a question in a manner that
requires the individual to disclose the need for reasonable
accommodation.  For example, as described later in this guidance,
an employer may not ask, "Can you do these functions with ___
without ___ reasonable accommodation?  (Check One)"
12. It should be noted that an employer might lawfully ask
questions about the need for reasonable accommodation on the job
and then fail to hire the applicant.  The rejected applicant may
then claim that the refusal to hire was based on the need for
accommodation.  Under these facts, the EEOC will consider the
employer's pre-offer questions as evidence that the employer knew
about the need for reasonable accommodation, and will carefully
scrutinize whether the need to provide accommodation was a reason
for rejecting the applicant.
13. However, investigators should be aware that Title VII
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, applies to such
questions and that nothing in this Enforcement Guidance relieves
an employer of its obligations to comply with Title VII.  The
Commission has previously provided guidance for investigators to
follow concerning an employer's use of arrest/conviction records.
See Policy Guidance No. N-915-061 (9/7/90) ("Policy Guidance on
the Consideration of Arrest Records in Employment Decisions under
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000e et seq. (1982)"); EEOC Compliance Manual, Vol. II,
Appendices 604-A ("Conviction Records") and 604-B ("Conviction
Records - Statistics").
14. "Drug" means a controlled substance, as defined in
schedules I through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substances
Act (21 U.S.C. § 812).  29 C.F.R. § 1630.3(a)(1).
15. 42 U.S.C. § 12114(a); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.3(a).
16. Of course, an employer cannot use a test in violation of other
federal civil rights statutes.  For example, if a test has an
adverse impact under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., it must be shown to be
job-related and consistent with business necessity.
17. Although physical agility tests and physical fitness tests
are not "medical" examinations, these tests are still subject to
other parts of the ADA.  For example, if a physical fitness test
which requires applicants to run one mile in ten minutes screens
out an applicant on the basis of disability, the employer must be
prepared to demonstrate that the test is "job-related and
consistent with business necessity."
18. A polygraph examination purportedly measures whether a person
believes s/he is telling the truth in response to a particular
inquiry.  The examination does not measure health or impairments.
Rather, it just measures relative changes in physiological
responses of the test taker.
19.  But, if an individual is screened out because of disability,
the employer must show that the exclusionary criterion is job-
related and consistent with business necessity.  42 U.S.C. §
12112(b); 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.10, 1630.14(b)(3).
20. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(3); 29 C.F.R. §
1630.14(b)(1),(2).
21. Id.
22. Once again, if an examination or inquiry screens out someone
because of disability, the exclusionary criteria must be "job-
related and consistent with business necessity."  Where safety
considerations are the reason, the individual can only be screened
out because s/he poses a "direct threat."
23. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(b)(1)(i-iii).
24. See 42 U.S.C. § 12201(b); 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. §
1630.14(b).
25. See 42 U.S.C. § 12201(c); 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. §
1630.14(b).  For example, an employer may submit medical
information to the company's health insurance carrier if the
information is needed to administer a health insurance plan in
accordance with § 501(c) of the ADA.
26. A notation that an individual has taken sick leave or had a
doctor's appointment is not confidential medical information.  Of
course, documentation of the individual's diagnosis or symptoms
would be medical information.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov