Equal Employment Opportunity Laws | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Equal Employment Opportunity Laws
Equal Employment Opportunity Laws
Equal Pay Act of 1963
(
EPA
)
The EPA prohibits sex-based pay discrimination between workers for the same employer who perform jobs that require substantially equal skill, effort, and responsibility under similar working conditions.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(
Title VII
)
Title VII prohibits employment discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation and transgender status), and national origin.
Pregnancy Discrimination Act (PDA) of 1978
The PDA amended Title VII to prohibit discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967
The ADEA prohibits employment discrimination against people who are 40 years of age or older.
Sections 501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 501 and Section 505) of 1973
Section 501 prohibits employment discrimination against applicants or employees of the federal government who are individuals with disabilities. Section 505 contains provisions governing remedies and attorney’s fees under Section 501.
Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1992
The 1992 Amendments changed the earlier Rehabilitation Act term “handicapped person” to “individual with a disability” and provided that the standards applied under Title I of the ADA apply to employment discrimination determinations.
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 504) of 1973
Section 504 prohibits organizations and employers from excluding or denying individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to receive program benefits and services. EEOC has two primary roles with respect to Section 504: Advising federal agencies on compliance with employment-related matters under Section 504, in its
coordination
role, and ensuring EEOC compliance with 504 in its own
federally conducted activities
.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 (Titles I and V)
Titles I and V of the ADA make discrimination against a qualified individual on the basis of disability by private employers, most businesses, and state and local governments illegal. Title I addresses employment discrimination on the basis of disability. Title V addresses related matters, including regulations, technical assistance, retaliation, and more.
ADA Amendments Act (ADAAA) of 2008
The ADAAA amends the ADA.
The ADAAA clarifies that the definition of disability does not require extensive analysis and should be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals, to the maximum extent permitted by the ADA.
Sections 102 and 103 of the Civil Rights Act (CRA) of 1991
Sections 102 and 103 of the CRA amend Title VII, Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, and the ADA to permit jury trials and compensatory and punitive damage awards in intentional discrimination cases, among other statutory changes
Government Employee Rights Act (GERA) of 1991
GERA protects certain state government employees from discrimination on the basis of
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability
.
Protected applicants or employees include any individual chosen or appointed by a person elected to public office in any State or political subdivision of any State to be a member of the elected official’s personal or policymaking staff or to advise the official on the constitutional or legal powers of the office.
Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act (No FEAR Act) of 2002
The No FEAR Act requires federal agencies to be accountable for violations of anti-discrimination and whistleblower protection laws by paying for settlements, awards, or judgments against them in whistleblower and discrimination cases out of their own budgets.
Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee Antidiscrimination Act (Elijah E. Cummings Act) of 2020
The Cummings Act requires federal agencies to enhance transparency about discrimination or retaliation affecting their own workforce.
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) of 2008
(Title II
)
GINA’s Title II prohibits the use of genetic information, including family medical history, in making employment decisions, such as hiring, firing, advancement, pay, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009
The Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act amends Title VII, the ADA, and the ADEA to clarify that a discriminatory compensation decision unlawful under those acts occurs each time compensation is paid pursuant to the discriminatory decision.
Pregnant Workers Fairness Act of 2022
The PWFA requires covered employers to provide reasonable accommodations to an employee’s or applicant’s known limitations related to pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions, unless the accommodation will cause the employer an undue hardship.
Enabled In-page Navigation
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov