Fact Sheet for Small Businesses: Pregnancy Discrimination | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Fact Sheet for Small Businesses: Pregnancy Discrimination
Fact Sheet for Small Businesses:  Pregnancy Discrimination
Translate this Page
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
English
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Español (Spanish)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
Issuing Authority
This technical assistance document was issued upon approval of the Chair of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-NVTA-0000-3
Concise Display Name
Fact Sheet for Small Businesses:  Pregnancy Discrimination
Issue Date
06-14-2014
General Topics
Sex/Pregnancy
Summary
This document provides information on how to comply with the Pregnancy Discrimination Act’s requirements for applicants and employees with respect to pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions in violation of Title VII, as amended by the Pregnant
Citation
Title VII, 29 CFR Part 1604
Document Applicant
Small Business, Employees, Employers, Applicants, HR Practitioners
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
Notice concerning the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act of 2022
This document was issued prior to enactment of the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (PWFA), which took effect on June 27, 2023. The PWFA expands the rights of workers affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions to receive reasonable accommodations, absent undue hardship. To learn about protections under the PWFA, visit
What You Should Know About the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act
.
This document explains the requirements of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act (
PDA
), as well as the requirements of Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act (
ADA
) as it applies to women with pregnancy-related disabilities.  The PDA and ADA apply to employers with 15 or more employees.
Basic PDA Requirements
The PDA requires that a covered employer treat women affected by
pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions
in the
same
manner as other applicants or employees who are
similar in their ability or inability to work
.  The PDA covers all aspects of employment, including firing, hiring, promotions, and fringe benefits (such as leave and health insurance benefits).  Pregnant workers are protected from discrimination based on current pregnancy, past pregnancy, and potential pregnancy.
Current pregnancy
. Under the PDA, an employer cannot fire, refuse to hire, demote, or take any other adverse action against a woman if pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition was a motivating factor in the adverse employment action.
This is true even if the employer believes it is acting in the employee's best interest.
Past Pregnancy.
An employer may not discriminate against an employee or applicant based on a past pregnancy or pregnancy-related medical condition or childbirth.  For example, an employer may not fire a woman because of pregnancy during or at the end of her maternity leave.
Potential Pregnancy.
An employer may not discriminate based on an employee's intention or potential to become pregnant.  For example, an employer may not exclude a woman from a job involving processing certain chemicals out of concern that exposure would be harmful to a fetus if the employee became pregnant.  Concerns about risks to a pregnant employee or her fetus will
rarely, if ever,
justify sex-specific job restrictions for a woman of childbearing capacity.
Medical Condition Related to Pregnancy or Childbirth.
An employer may not discriminate against an employee because of a medical condition related to pregnancy and must treat the employee the same as others who are similar in their ability or inability to work but are not affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions.  For example, under the PDA, since lactation is a medical condition related to pregnancy, an employer
may not discriminate against an employee because of her breastfeeding schedule
.
(For information about a provision of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that provides additional protections for breastfeeding employees, see the section on "Other Federal Laws Protecting Pregnant Workers" below.).
Harassment
It is unlawful to harass a woman because of pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition.   Harassment is illegal when it is
so frequent or severe
that it creates a
hostile or offensive environment
, or when it results in an adverse employment decision (such as the victim being fired or demoted).
Workers with Caregiving Responsibilities
Discrimination against a worker with caregiving responsibilities violates Title VII if it is based on sex, and violates the ADA if it is based on a family member's disability
.  For example, an employer violates Title VII by treating a female employee with young children less favorably than a male employee with young children when deciding on work opportunities, based on a belief that the mother should focus more on the children than on her career.  In addition, an employer violates the ADA where it takes an adverse action, such as refusing to hire or denying promotion, against a mother of a newborn with a disability over concerns that she would take off a lot of time for the child's care or that the child's medical condition would impose high health care costs.
Benefits of Employment
An employer must provide the same benefits of employment to women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions that it provides to other persons who are
similar in their ability or inability to work
.
Light Duty Policies.
An employer has to treat women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions the same as other employees who are similar in their ability or inability to work with respect to light duty, alternative assignments, disability leave, or unpaid leave.
An employer that provides light duty to other employees cannot justify denying it to a pregnant worker just because it would be more expensive or less convenient to do so.
Even if a light duty policy does not specifically exclude pregnant workers, it may still violate the PDA if it imposes significant burdens on pregnant employees for which there is not a sufficiently strong justification. For example, providing light duty to a large percentage of non-pregnant employees with limitations while denying light duty to a large percentage of pregnant employees may be difficult to justify.
Leave:
While an employer may not compel an employee to take leave because she is pregnant as long as she is able to perform her job, it
must allow
women with physical limitations resulting from pregnancy to take leave on the same terms and conditions (e.g., provide them with the same amount of leave) as others who are
similar in their ability or inability to work.
An employer:
may not single out an employee's pregnancy-related condition for medical clearance procedures that are not required of
employees
who are similar in their ability or inability to work,
may not remove a pregnant employee from her job because of pregnancy as long as she is able to perform her job, and
must allow her to return to work following recovery
from a pregnancy-related condition to the same extent that employees on sick and disability leave for other reasons are allowed to return.
If the pregnant employee used leave under
the Family and Medical Leave Act
, the employer must restore the employee to the employee's original job or to an equivalent job with equivalent pay, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment. (For information about the Family and Medical Leave Act, see the section on "Other Federal Laws Protecting Pregnant Workers" below.).
Title I of the ADA may require an employer to provide leave
beyond that which it usually allows its employees to take,
as a reasonable accommodation for an employee with a pregnancy-related impairment that is a disability.
Medical Benefits.
The PDA requires employers who offer health insurance to include coverage of pregnancy, childbirth, and related medical conditions.  An employer must provide the
same terms and conditions for pregnancy-related benefits
as it provides for benefits relating to other medical conditions.
The Americans with Disabilities Act
Although pregnancy itself is not a disability,
pregnant workers may have impairments related to their pregnancies that qualify as disabilities under the ADA.
Amendments to the ADA made in 2008 make it much easier than it used to be to show that an impairment is a disability.  A number of pregnancy-related impairments are likely to be disabilities,
even though they are temporary,
such as pregnancy-related carpal tunnel syndrome, gestational diabetes, pregnancy-related sciatica, and preeclampsia.
An employer may not discriminate against an individual whose pregnancy-related impairment is a disability under the ADA and must provide an individual with a
reasonable accommodation
if needed because of a pregnancy-related disability, unless the accommodation would result in
significant difficulty or expense ("undue hardship").
Examples of reasonable accommodations that may be necessary for a pregnancy-related disability include:
Redistributing
marginal
or nonessential functions (for example, occasional lifting) that a pregnant worker cannot perform, or altering how an essential or marginal function is performed;
Modifying workplace policies
by allowing a pregnant worker more frequent breaks or allowing her to keep a water bottle at a workstation even though the employer generally prohibits employees from keeping drinks at their workstations;
Modifying a work schedule
so that someone who experiences severe morning sickness can arrive later than her usual start time and leave later to make up the time;
Allowing a pregnant worker placed on bed rest to
telework where feasible
;
Granting leave
in addition to what an employer would normally provide under a sick leave policy;
Purchasing or modifying equipment
, such as a stool for a pregnant employee who needs to sit while performing job tasks typically performed while standing; and
Temporarily reassigning
an employee to a
light duty
Other Federal Laws Affecting Pregnant Workers
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
allows eligible employees of employers with
50 or more employees
to take up to
12 workweeks
of leave for, among other things, the birth and care of the employee's newborn child and for the employee's own serious health condition.  The Department of Labor enforces the FMLA.  For more information about the FMLA see
http://www.dol.gov/whd
.
Section 4207 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act amended the Fair Labor Standards Act to require employers to provide "reasonable break time" for hourly employees to express breast milk until the child's first birthday.  Employers are required to provide "a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public, which may be used by an employee to express breast milk."
Employers with fewer than 50 employees
are not subject to this requirement if it "would impose an undue hardship by causing significant difficulty or expense when considered in relation to the size, nature, or structure of the employer's business."  DOL has published a Fact Sheet providing general information on the break time requirement for nursing mothers.  The Fact Sheet can be found at
http://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs73.htm
.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov