Fact Sheet: Religious Accommodations in the Workplace | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Fact Sheet: Religious Accommodations in the Workplace
Fact Sheet: Religious Accommodations in the Workplace
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 requires employers to make reasonable accommodations for an applicant or employee whose sincerely held religious belief, practice, or observance conflicts with a work requirement, unless providing the accommodation would create an undue hardship for the employer. The law aims to prevent individuals from being forced to choose between their religious convictions and practices and their job.
What is a religious accommodation?
A religious accommodation is an adjustment to a work requirement that will allow the employee to comply with their religious beliefs, which need not be confined to traditional concepts of religion. The employer’s duty to accommodate will usually entail making a special exception from, or adjustment to, a particular work requirement so that an employee or applicant will be able to observe or practice their religion.
Can employers discriminate against someone who needs a religious accommodation?
No, employers cannot refuse to hire, terminate, or otherwise discriminate as to any term or condition of employment because someone may need a religious accommodation that could be provided without undue hardship. The EEOC has taken the position that employers also may not retaliate against any applicant or employee for seeking a religious accommodation.
What kinds of accommodations are available?
A wide variety of changes potentially can be reasonable religious accommodations. Common examples include:
Schedule changes:
Scheduling around religious observances and providing flexible work and break schedules to accommodate religious obligations such as daily prayers or Sabbath observance.
Religious expression in the workplace:
Permitting employees to pray or engage in other forms of religious expression at work. For example, permitting the use of workstations or employer facilities for individual or voluntary group prayer or meditation.
Dress and grooming:
Allowing exceptions to dress and grooming policies. For example, allowing employees to wear a cross necklace, hijab, turban, yarmulke or kippah, abaya, or ash mark, or to have facial hair, or to carry a kirpan.
What is an undue hardship?
An undue hardship arises when the burden of granting an accommodation would be substantial in the overall context of an employer’s business. An undue hardship could include increased costs; reduced productivity; or infringements on other employees’ job rights, such as accommodations that reasonably threaten to create a hostile work environment or create a substantial risk to workplace safety, health, or security. However, coworker objections based on hostility to religion or customer fears or prejudices are not an undue hardship. Whether an accommodation creates an undue hardship depends on the particular facts. For example, if wearing pants when working near a particular type of machine is necessary for safety reasons, an accommodation to allow an employee to wear a loose-fitting skirt for religious reasons while working near that machine may cause undue hardship. While an employer can refuse to provide a particular accommodation if it would pose an undue hardship, employers and employees should confer fully and promptly to explore other available accommodation options.
How can an employee request a religious accommodation?
An employee seeking a religious accommodation should make their employer aware of their need for an accommodation for a religious reason. The request need not be in writing, and so long as the employer knows the employee needs a religious accommodation, no “magic words” are required.
You can find more information on religious discrimination at
www.eeoc.gov/religious-discrimination
.
If you suspect discrimination, contact the EEOC promptly because there are strict time limits for
filing a charge
.
Enabled In-page Navigation
Download a PDF version of this document
Related Factsheets
Examples of EEOC Enforcement Efforts for Failure to Provide Religious Accommodations to Muslims
Anti-Arab, Anti-Middle Eastern, Anti-Muslim, and Antisemitic Discrimination Are Illegal
What to Do if You Face Antisemitism at Work
Learn About
Religious Discrimination
National Origin Discrimination
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov