How to File a Charge of Employment Discrimination | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
How to File a Charge of Employment Discrimination
How to File a Charge of Employment Discrimination
Note
: Federal employees and applicants for federal jobs have a
different complaint process
.
We are here to serve you!
A charge of discrimination is a signed statement asserting that an organization engaged in employment discrimination. It requests EEOC to take remedial action. The laws enforced by EEOC, except for the Equal Pay Act, require you to
file a charge
before you can file a lawsuit for unlawful discrimination. There are strict
time limits for filing a charge
.
Time Limits for Filing a Charge
Where the discrimination took place can determine
how long you have to file a charge
. The 180-calendar-day filing deadline is extended to 300- calendar days if a state or local agency enforces a state
or
local law that prohibits employment discrimination on the same basis. The rules are slightly different for age discrimination charges. For age discrimination, the filing deadline is only extended to 300 days if there is a
state
law prohibiting age discrimination in employment
and
a state agency or authority enforcing that law. The deadline is
not
extended if
only
a local law prohibits age discrimination.
Online - Use the EEOC Public Portal to Submit an Inquiry, Schedule an Appointment, and File a Charge
As a first step, we ask you to access the
EEOC Public Portal
to submit an inquiry about the issue you wish to discuss. You will be asked to schedule a telephone interview, interview by video, or an in-person interview at one of our 53 EEOC offices. As noted above, there are strict deadlines for filing a charge of discrimination. If your filing deadline is fast approaching, please contact 1-800-669-4000 to ask for an immediate interview.  You may also visit an EEOC office to discuss your matter.
In Person at an EEOC Office
Our offices are open from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Changes to the operating status of specific offices, including temporary closures, can be found at
EEOC Field Offices | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
. If you prefer not to wait for an appointment to become available in the Public Portal and instead wish to speak with an EEOC staff member immediately, you may visit one of our 53 EEOC offices in person. Please note that we will make every effort to take your Charge of Discrimination during your visit.  In some instances, staff may not be able to conduct a full interview but will instead answer your questions and share key information, including next steps for filing a charge. Individuals who have scheduled in-person appointments through the Public Portal will be seen at the scheduled appointment time. Walk-ins will be seen on a “first come, first served basis,” with those having imminent filing deadlines seen first.
By Telephone
Although we do not take charges over the phone, you can get the process started over the phone. You can call 1-800-669-4000 to discuss your situation.  A representative will ask you for some basic information to determine if your situation is covered by the laws we enforce and explain how to file a charge.
At a State or Local Fair Employment Practice Agency
Many states and localities have agencies that enforce laws prohibiting employment discrimination. EEOC refers to these agencies as Fair Employment Practices Agencies (FEPAs). EEOC and some FEPAs have worksharing agreements in place to prevent the duplication of effort in charge processing. According to these agreements, if you file a charge with either EEOC or a FEPA, the charge also will be automatically filed with the other agency. This process, which is defined as
dual filing
, helps to protect charging party rights under both federal and state or local law. If you file a charge at a state or local agency, you can let them know if you also want your charge filed with the EEOC.
By Mail
If you have 60 days or fewer in which to file a timely charge, the EEOC Public Portal will provide special directions for providing necessary information to the EEOC and how to file your charge quickly.
You can also file a charge by sending us a letter that includes the following information:
Your name, address, email, and telephone number
The name, address, email, and telephone number of the employer (or employment agency or union) you want to file your charge against
The number of employees employed there (if known)
A short description of the actions you believe were discriminatory (for example, you were fired, demoted, harassed)
When the discriminatory actions took place
Why you believe you were discriminated against (for example, because of your race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy, transgender status, and sexual orientation), national origin, age (40 or older), disability, genetic information, or retaliation
Your signature
Don't forget to sign your letter. If you don't sign it, we cannot investigate it.
Your letter will be reviewed and if more information is needed, we will contact you to gather that information.
Help improve this site
Close this Window
Translate this Page
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
English
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Español (Spanish)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
Português (Portuguese)
Log into the
EEOC Public Portal
to:
Submit an inquiry online
Schedule an intake interview
If you are a licensed attorney filing on behalf of a client, use
EEOC E-File for Attorneys
to:
Upload a charge signed by your client OR create and submit a charge that your client can sign through the EEOC Public Portal
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov