Interim Enforcement Guidance on the application of the ADA to disability-based distinctions in employer-provided health insurance | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Interim Enforcement Guidance on the application of the ADA to disability-based distinctions in employer-provided health insurance
Interim Enforcement Guidance on the application of the ADA to disability-based distinctions in employer-provided health insurance
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1993-1
Concise Display Name
Interim Enforcement Guidance on the application of the ADA to disability-based distinctions in employer-provided health insurance
Issue Date
06-08-1993
General Topics
Disability
Summary
This 1993 document addresses the Commission’s position on the application of the ADA to disability-based distinctions in employer-provided health insurance.
Citation
ADA, Rehabilitation Act, 29 CFR Part 1630, 29 CFR Part 1614
Document Applicant
Employers, Employees, Applicants, Attorneys and Practitioners, EEOC Staff
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
Notice Concerning The Americans With Disabilities Act Amendments Act Of 2008
This document was issued prior to enactment of the
Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA)
, which took effect on January 1, 2009.  The ADAAA broadened the statutory definition of disability, as summarized in this
list of specific changes.
EEOC NOTICE
Number 915.002
Date 6/8/93
1.     SUBJECT:  Interim Enforcement Guidance on the application of
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 to disability-based
distinctions in employer provided health insurance.
2.     PURPOSE:  This interim enforcement guidance sets forth the
Commission's position on the application of the Americans with
Disabilities Act to disability-based distinctions in employer
provided health insurance.
3.     EFFECTIVE DATE:  Upon issuance.
4.     EXPIRATION DATE:  As an exception to EEOC Order 205.001,
Appendix B, Attachment 4, § a(5), this Notice will remain in
effect until rescinded or superseded.
5.     ORIGINATOR:  Americans with Disabilities Act Division,
Office of Legal Counsel.
6.     INSTRUCTIONS:  This enforcement guidance is to be used on an
interim basis until the Commission issues final guidance after
publication for notice and comment.  File after [     ] of Volume II
of the Compliance Manual.
7.     SUBJECT MATTER:
I.     INTRODUCTION
The interplay between the nondiscrimination principles of the
ADA and employer provided health insurance, which is predicated on
the ability to make health-related distinctions, is both unique and
complex.  This interplay is, undoubtedly, most complex when a health
insurance plan contains distinctions that are based on disability.
The purpose of this interim guidance is to assist Commission
investigators in analyzing ADA charges which allege that a
disability-based distinction in the terms or provisions of an
employer provided health insurance plan violates the ADA.1  This
interim guidance does not address the application of the ADA to other
issues arising in the context of employer provided health insurance.
Nor does it address the application of the ADA to other types of
"fringe benefits," such as employer provided pension plans, life
insurance, and disability insurance.  These subjects will be
addressed in future documents.
II.  BACKGROUND AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK
The ADA provides that it is unlawful for an employer2 to
discriminate on the basis of disability against a qualified
individual with a disability in regard to "job application
procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees,
employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and
privileges of employment."  42 U.S.C. § 12112(a).  Section
1630.4 of the Commission's regulations implementing the employment
provisions of the ADA further provides, in pertinent part, that it is
unlawful for an employer to discriminate on the basis of disability
against a qualified individual with a disability in regard to
"[f]ringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or not
administered by the [employer]."  29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.4(f).  Employee benefit plans, including health insurance
plans provided by an employer to its employees, are a fringe benefit
available by virtue of employment.  Generally speaking, therefore,
the ADA prohibits employers from discriminating on the basis of
disability in the provision of health insurance to their employees.
The ADA also prohibits employers from indirectly discriminating
on the basis of disability in the provision of health insurance.
Employers may not enter into, or participate in, a contractual or
other arrangement or relationship that has the effect of
discriminating against their own qualified applicants or employees
with disabilities.  42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(2); 29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.6(a).  Contractual or other relationships with
organizations that provide fringe benefits to employees are expressly
included in this prohibition.  42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(2); 29
C.F.R. § 1630.6(b).  This means that an employer will be liable
for any discrimination resulting from a contract or agreement with an
insurance company, health maintenance organization (HMO), third party
administrator
(TPA), stop-loss carrier, or other organization to provide or
administer a health insurance plan on behalf of its employees.
Another provision of the ADA makes it unlawful for an employer
to limit, segregate, or classify an applicant or employee in a way
that adversely affects his or her employment opportunities or status
on the basis of disability.  42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(1); 29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.5.  Both the legislative history and the interpretive
Appendix to the regulations indicate that this prohibition applies to
employer provided health insurance.  S. Rep. No. 116, 101st Cong.,
1st Sess. (Senate Report) (1989) at 28-29; H.R. Rep. No. 485 part 2,
101st Cong., 2nd Sess. (House Labor Report) (1990) at 58-59; H.R.
Rep. No. 485 part 3, 101st Cong., 2nd Sess. (House Judiciary Report)
(1990) at 36; Appendix to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.5.
Several consequences result from the application of these
statutory provisions.  First, disability-based insurance plan
distinctions are permitted only if they are within the protective
ambit of section 501(c) of the ADA. (See the discussion in Section
III, infra.)  Second, decisions about the employment of an individual
with a disability cannot be motivated by concerns about the impact of
the individual's disability on the employer's health insurance plan.
Appendix to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.15(a).  Third, employees with
disabilities must be accorded "equal access" to whatever health
insurance the employer provides to employees without disabilities.
See Appendix to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.16(f).  Fourth, in view of the
statute's "association provision," 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(4); 29
C.F.R. § 1630.8, it would violate the ADA for an employer to
make an employment decision about any person, whether or not that
person has a disability, because of concerns about the impact on the
health insurance plan of the disability of someone else with whom
that person has a relationship.
As previously noted, this interim guidance is devoted solely to
the ADA implications of disability-based health insurance plan
distinctions.  The ADA implications of other issues arising in the
context of employer provided health insurance will be addressed in
future guidance.
III.  DISABILITY-BASED DISTINCTIONS
A.  Framework of Analysis
Whenever it is alleged that a health-related term or provision
of an employer provided health insurance plan violates the ADA, the
first issue is whether the challenged term or provision is, in fact,
a disability-based distinction.  If the Commission determines that a
challenged health insurance plan term or provision is a disability-
based distinction, the respondent will be required to prove that that
disability-based distinction is within the protective ambit of
section 501(c) of the ADA.
In pertinent part, section 501(c) permits employers, insurers,
and plan administrators to establish and/or observe the terms of an
insured3 health insurance plan that is "bona fide,"4 based on
"underwriting risks, classifying risks, or administering such risks
that are based on or not inconsistent with State law," and that is
not being used as a "subterfuge" to evade the purposes of the ADA.
Section 501(c) likewise permits employers, insurers, and plan
administrators to establish and/or observe the terms of a "bona fide"
self-insured health insurance plan that is not used as
a "subterfuge."  42 U.S.C. § 12201(c).  The text of section
501(c) is incorporated into § 1630.16(f) of the Commission's
regulations.5
Consequently, if the Commission determines that the challenged
term or provision is a disability-based distinction, the respondent
will be required to prove that: 1) the health insurance plan is
either a bona fide insured health insurance plan that is not
inconsistent with state law, or a bona fide self-insured health
insurance plan;6 and 2) the challenged disability-based distinction
is not being used as a subterfuge.  If the respondent so
demonstrates, the Commission will conclude that the challenged
disability-based distinction is within the protective ambit of
section 501(c) and does not violate the ADA.  If, on the other hand,
the respondent is unable to make this two-pronged demonstration, the
Commission will conclude that the respondent has violated the ADA.
B.  What Is a Disability-Based Distinction?
It is important to note that not all health-related plan
distinctions discriminate on the basis of disability.  Insurance
distinctions that are not based on disability, and that are applied
equally to all insured employees, do not discriminate on the basis of
disability and so do not violate the ADA.7
For example, a feature of some employer provided health
insurance plans is a distinction between the benefits provided for
the treatment of physical conditions on the one hand, and the
benefits provided for the treatment of "mental/nervous" conditions on
the other.  Typically, a lower level of benefits is provided for the
treatment of mental/nervous conditions than is provided for the
treatment of physical conditions.  Similarly, some health insurance
plans provide fewer benefits for "eye care" than for other physical
conditions.  Such broad distinctions, which apply to the treatment of
a multitude of dissimilar conditions and which constrain individuals
both with and without disabilities, are not distinctions based on
disability.  Consequently, although such distinctions may have a
greater impact on certain individuals with disabilities, they do not
intentionally discriminate on the basis of disability8 and do not
violate the ADA.9
Blanket pre-existing condition clauses that exclude from the
coverage of a health insurance plan the treatment of conditions that
pre-date an individual's eligibility for benefits under that plan
also are not distinctions based on disability, and do not violate the
ADA.  Universal limits or exclusions from coverage of all
experimental drugs and/or treatments, or of all "elective surgery,"
are likewise not insurance distinctions based on disability.
Similarly, coverage limits on medical procedures that are not
exclusively, or nearly exclusively, utilized for the treatment of a
particular disability are not distinctions based on disability.
Thus, for example, it would not violate the ADA for an employer to
limit the number of blood transfusions or X-rays that it will pay
for, even though this may have an adverse effect on individuals with
certain disabilities.
Example 1.  The R Company health insurance plan limits the benefits
provided for the treatment of any physical conditions to a maximum of
$25,000 per year.  CP, an employee of R, files a charge of
discrimination alleging that the $25,000 cap violates the ADA because
it is insufficient to cover the cost of treatment for her cancer.
The $25,000 cap does not single out a specific disability, discrete
group of disabilities, or disability in general.  It is therefore not
a disability-based distinction.  If it is applied equally to all
insured employees, it does not violate the ADA.
In contrast, however, health-related insurance distinctions that
are based on disability may violate the ADA.  A term or provision is
"disability-based" if it singles out a particular disability (e.g.,
deafness, AIDS, schizophrenia), a discrete group of disabilities
(e.g., cancers, muscular dystrophies, kidney diseases), or disability
in general (e.g., non-coverage of all conditions that substantially
limit a major life activity).
As previously noted, employers may establish and/or observe the
terms and provisions of a bona fide benefit plan, including terms or
provisions based on disability, that are not a "subterfuge to evade
the purposes" of the ADA.  Such terms and provisions do not violate
the ADA.  However, disability-based insurance distinctions that are a
"subterfuge" do intentionally discriminate on the basis of disability
and so violate the ADA.
Example 2.  R Company's new self-insured health insurance plan caps
benefits for the treatment of all physical conditions, except AIDS,
at $100,000 per year.  The treatment of AIDS is capped at $5,000 per
year.  CP, an employee with AIDS enrolled in the health insurance
plan, files a charge alleging that the lower AIDS cap violates the
ADA.  The lower AIDS cap is a disability-based distinction.
Accordingly, if R is unable to demonstrate that its health insurance
plan is bona fide and that the AIDS cap is not a subterfuge, a
violation of the ADA will be found.
Example 3.  R Company has a health insurance plan that excludes from
coverage treatment for any pre-existing blood disorders for a period
of 18 months, but does not exclude the treatment of any other pre-
existing conditions.  R's pre-existing condition clause only excludes
treatment for a discrete group of related disabilities, e.g.,
hemophilia, leukemia, and is thus a disability-based distinction.
CP, an individual with acute leukemia who recently joined R Company
and enrolled in its health insurance plan, files a charge of
discrimination alleging that the disability-based pre-existing
condition clause violates the ADA.  If R is unable to demonstrate
that its health insurance plan is bona fide and that the disability-
specific pre-existing condition clause is not a subterfuge, a
violation of the ADA will be found.
It should be noted that the ADA does not provide a "safe harbor"
for health insurance plans that were adopted prior to its July 26,
1990 enactment.  As the Senate Report states, subterfuge is to be
determined "regardless of the date an insurance or employer benefit
plan was adopted."  Senate Report at 85; see also House Labor report
at 136-138; House Judiciary Report at 70-71; Appendix to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.16(f).  Consequently, the challenged disability-based
terms and provisions of a pre-ADA health insurance plan will be
scrutinized under the same subterfuge standard as are the challenged
disability-based terms, provisions, and conditions of post-ADA health
insurance plans.10
C.  The Respondent's Burden of Proof
Once the Commission has determined that a challenged health
insurance term or provision constitutes a disability-based
distinction, the respondent must prove that the health insurance plan
is either a bona fide insured plan that is not inconsistent with
state law, or a bona fide self-insured plan.   The respondent must
also prove that the challenged disability-based distinction is not
being used as a subterfuge.  Requiring the respondent to bear this
burden of proving entitlement to the protection of section 501(c) is
consistent with the well-established principle that the burden of
proof should rest with the party who has the greatest access to the
relevant facts.11  In the health insurance context, it is the
respondent employer (and/or the employer's insurer, if any) who has
control of the risk assessment, actuarial, and/or claims data relied
upon in adopting the challenged disability-based distinction.
Charging party employees have no access to such data, and, generally
speaking, have no information about the employer provided health
insurance plan beyond that contained in the employer provided health
insurance plan description.  Consequently, it is the employer who
should bear the burden of proving that the challenged disability-
based insurance distinction is within the protective ambit of section
501(c).
1.  The Health Insurance Plan Is "Bona Fide" and
Consistent with Applicable Law
In order to gain the protection of section 501(c) for a
challenged disability-based insurance distinction, the respondent
must first prove that the health insurance plan in which the
challenged distinction is contained is either a bona fide insured
health insurance plan that is not inconsistent with state law, or a
bona fide self-insured health insurance plan.12  If the health
insurance plan is an insured plan, the respondent will be able to
satisfy this requirement by proving that: 1) the health insurance
plan is bona fide in that it exists and pays benefits, and its terms
have been accurately communicated to eligible employees; and 2) the
health insurance plan's terms are not inconsistent with applicable
state law as interpreted by the appropriate state authorities.13  If
the health insurance plan is a self-insured plan, the respondent will
only be required to prove that the health insurance plan is bona fide
in that it exists and pays benefits, and that its terms have been
accurately communicated to covered employees.
2. The Disability-Based Distinction Is Not a Subterfuge
The second demonstration that the respondent must make in order
to gain the protection of section 501(c) is that the challenged
disability-based distinction is not a subterfuge to evade the
purposes of the ADA.  "Subterfuge" refers to disability-based
disparate treatment that is not justified by the risks or costs
associated with the disability.  Whether a particular challenged
disability-based insurance distinction is being used as a subterfuge
will be determined on a case by case basis, considering the totality
of the circumstances.
The respondent can prove that a challenged disability-based
insurance distinction is not a subterfuge in several ways.  A non-
exclusive list of potential business/insurance justifications
follows.
a.  The respondent may prove that it has not engaged in the
disability-based disparate treatment alleged.  For example, where a
charging party has alleged that a benefit cap of a particular
catastrophic disability is discriminatory, the respondent may prove
that its health insurance plan actually treats all similarly
catastrophic conditions in the same way.
b.  The respondent may prove that the disparate treatment is
justified by legitimate actuarial data,14 or by actual or
reasonably anticipated experience, and that conditions with
comparable actuarial data and/or experience are treated in the same
fashion.  In other words, the respondent may prove that the
disability-based disparate treatment is attributable to the
application of legitimate risk classification and underwriting15
procedures to the increased risks (and thus increased cost to the
health insurance plan) of the disability, and not to the disability
per se.
c.  The respondent may prove that the disparate treatment is
necessary (i.e., that there is no nondisability-based health
insurance plan change that could be made) to ensure that the
challenged health insurance plan satisfies the commonly accepted or
legally required standards for the fiscal soundness of such an
insurance plan.  The respondent, for example, may prove that it
limited coverage for the treatment of a discrete group of
disabilities because continued unlimited coverage would have been so
expensive as to cause the health insurance plan to become financially
insolvent, and there was no nondisability-based health insurance plan
alteration that would have avoided insolvency.
d.  The respondent may prove that the challenged insurance
practice or activity is necessary (i.e., that there is no
nondisability-based change that could be made) to prevent the
occurrence of an unacceptable change either in the coverage of the
health insurance plan, or in the premiums charged for the health
insurance plan.  An "unacceptable" change is a drastic increase in
premium payments (or in co-payments or deductibles), or a drastic
alteration to the scope of coverage or level of benefits provided,
that would: 1) make the health insurance plan effectively unavailable
to a significant number of other employees, 2) make the health
insurance plan so unattractive as to result in significant adverse
selection16, or 3) make the health insurance plan so unattractive
that the employer cannot compete in recruiting and maintaining
qualified workers due to the superiority of health insurance plans
offered by other employers in the community.
e.  Where the charging party is challenging the respondent's
denial of coverage for a disability-specific treatment, the
respondent may prove that this treatment does not provide any benefit
(i.e., has no medical value).  The respondent, in other words, may
prove by reliable scientific evidence that the disability-specific
treatment does not cure the condition, slow the
degeneration/deterioration or harm attributable to the condition,
alleviate the symptoms of the condition, or maintain the current
health status of individuals with the disability who receive the
treatment.17
IV. COVERAGE OF DEPENDENTS
The coverage of an employee's dependents under an employer
provided health insurance plan is a benefit available to the employee
by virtue of employment.  Consequently, insurance terms, provisions,
and conditions concerning dependent coverage are subject to the same
ADA standards, including the application of section 501(c) to
disability-based distinctions, as are other insurance terms,
provisions, and conditions.
The ADA, however, does not require that the coverage accorded
dependents be the same in scope as the coverage accorded the
employee.  For example, it would not violate the ADA for a health
insurance plan to cover prescription drugs for employees, but not to
include such coverage for employee dependents.  Nor does the ADA
require that dependents be accorded the same level of benefits as
that accorded the employee.  Thus, it would not violate the ADA for a
health insurance plan to have a $100,000 benefit cap for employees,
but only a $50,000 benefit cap for employee dependents.
V. CHARGE PROCESSING
1.  In General
Charges alleging that a term or provision of an employer
provided health insurance plan discriminates on the basis of
disability should be processed in accordance with the foregoing
guidance.  When confronted with a charge alleging that a health
insurance plan distinction is a disability-based distinction that
violates the ADA, the investigator should initially determine whether
the challenged insurance term or provision is, in fact, a disability-
based distinction .  To do this, the investigator should determine
whether:
1)  the insurance term, provision, or condition singles out a
particular disability, discrete group of disabilities, or disability
in general; and/or
2)  the insurance term, provision, or condition singles out a
procedure or treatment used exclusively, or nearly exclusively, for
the treatment of a particular disability or discrete group of
disabilities (e.g., exclusion of a drug used only to treat AIDS).
(Section III. B, supra.)
If it is determined that the challenged insurance term or
provision is not a disability-based distinction and is applied
equally to all insured employees, the investigator should conclude
that the health insurance plan distinction does not violate the ADA.
On the other hand, if the challenged insurance term or provision
is found to be a disability-based distinction, the investigator
should determine whether the respondent can justify the disability-
based distinction by satisfying the requirements of section 501(c) of
the ADA.  To make this determination, the investigator should take
the steps described below.
1)  The investigator should obtain evidence from the respondent that
the health insurance plan is a bona fide plan.  (Section III.C.1,
supra.)
2)  If the health insurance plan is an insured plan, the investigator
should also obtain evidence from the respondent that the health
insurance plan is not inconsistent with the applicable state law(s).
(Section III.C.1, supra.)
3)  The investigator should obtain evidence from the respondent
relevant to any business/insurance justification proffered to justify
the disability-based insurance distinction.  The evidence obtained
should be specific and detailed.  For example, if the respondent is
relying on actuarial data to justify the disability-based
distinction, the investigator should require a detailed explanation
of the rationale underlying the disability-based distinction,
including the actuarial conclusions arrived at, the actuarial
assumptions relied upon to reach those conclusions, and the factual
data that supports the assumptions and/or conclusions.
Similarly, if the respondent asserts that the disability-based
distinction is justified by actual or reasonably anticipated
experience, the investigator should obtain evidence about the
respondent's insurance claims experience, and the way in which the
respondent has reacted to similar previous experience situations.  If
the respondent asserts that the disability-based distinction was
necessary to prevent the occurrence of an unacceptable change in
coverage or premiums, or to assure the fiscal soundness of the health
insurance plan, the investigator should obtain evidence of the
nondisability-based options for modifying the health insurance plan
that were considered and the reason(s) for the rejection of these
options.  If the respondent asserts that its health insurance plan
excludes a disability-specific treatment because it is of no medical
value, the investigator should obtain evidence regarding the
scientific evidence relied upon by the respondent in reaching that
determination.  (Section III.C.2, supra.)
Commission staff should direct questions concerning the guidance
or its application in particular cases to the Office of Legal Counsel
Attorney of the Day.
____________________               _____________________________
Date                                   Approved:  Tony Gallegos
Chairman
1.     In light of the recent amendments to the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, the analysis in this interim guidance also applies to federal
sector complaints of discrimination arising under section 501 of that
statute.
2.     The ADA also prohibits employment agencies, labor
organizations, and joint labor management committees from
discriminating in employment against qualified individuals with
disabilities.  However, for convenience, only the term "employer" is
used throughout this document.
3.     An "insured" health insurance plan is a health insurance plan
or policy that is purchased from an insurance company or other
organization, such as a health maintenance organization (HMO).  This
is in contrast to a "self-insured" health plan, where the employer
directly assumes the liability of an insurer.  Insured health
insurance plans are regulated by both ERISA and state law.  Self-
insured plans are typically subject to ERISA, but are not subject to
state laws that regulate insurance.
4.     The term "bona fide" is defined in Section III (C)(1), infra.
5.     Section 1630.16(f) states:
(f)  Health insurance, life insurance and other benefit plans-
(1)  An insurer, hospital, or medical service company, health
maintenance organization, or any agent or entity that administers
benefit plans, or similar organizations may underwrite risks,
classify risks, or administer such risks that are based on or not
inconsistent with State law.
(2)  A covered entity may establish, sponsor, observe, or
administer the terms of a bona fide benefit plan that are based
on underwriting risks, classifying risks, or administering such
risks that are based on or not inconsistent with State law.
(3)  A covered entity may establish, sponsor, observe, or
administer the terms of a bona fide benefit plan that is not
subject to State laws that regulate insurance.
(4)  The activities described in paragraphs (f)(1), (2) and
(3)... are permitted unless these activities are being used as a
subterfuge to evade the purposes of [Title I of the ADA].
6.     If an employer provided health insurance plan is a "multiple
employer welfare arrangement" (MEWA) pursuant to section 3(40) of
ERISA, it may be subject to certain state insurance laws even if it
is self-insured.  See footnote 13, infra.
7.     The term "discriminates" refers only to disparate treatment.
The adverse impact theory of discrimination is unavailable in this
context.  See Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287 (1985), a case
brought under § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.  See also
the discussion of Choate in the Senate Report at 85; House Labor
Report at 137.
8.     However, it would violate the ADA for an employer to
selectively apply a universal or "neutral" non-disability based
insurance distinction only to individuals with disabilities.  Thus,
for example, it would violate the ADA for an employer to apply a
"neutral" health insurance plan limitation on "eye care" only to an
employee seeking treatment for a vision disability, but not to other
employees who do not have vision disabilities.  Charges alleging that
a universal or "neutral" non-disability based insurance distinction
has been selectively applied to individuals with disabilities should
be processed using traditional disparate treatment theory and
analysis.
9.       This position is consistent with the case law developed
pursuant to § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended,
29 U.S.C. § 794, the statute on which the ADA is patterned.
Courts faced with challenges to insurance plan distinctions between
physical benefits and mental/nervous benefits under the
Rehabilitation Act have held that such distinctions are rational and
do not discriminate on the basis of disability.  See, e.g., Doe v.
Colautti, 592 F.2d 704 (3d Cir. 1979)(holding that Pennsylvania's
medical assistance statute was not required by the Rehabilitation Act
to provide the same level of benefits for inpatient hospital
treatment of mental illness as for inpatient hospital treatment of
physical illness;  the court noted that care for physical illness and
care for mental illness were two different benefits), and Doe v.
Devine, 545 F. Supp. 576 (D.D.C. 1982), aff'd on other grounds, 703
F. 2d 1319 (D.C. Cir. 1983)(holding that Blue Cross "cutbacks" in
mental health benefits for federal employees are reasonable and do
not discriminate on the basis of disability).
10.     It has been suggested that the Commission should interpret
"subterfuge" under the ADA as having the same meaning as was accorded
that term under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of
1967, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.  In Ohio Public Employees
Retirement System v. Betts, 492 U.S. 158 (1989), the Court held that
a pre-ADEA benefit plan could not be a subterfuge, and that, since
the ADEA did not expressly apply to fringe benefits, subterfuge
required a showing of the employer's specific intent to discriminate
in some non-fringe aspect of the employment relationship.  However,
both the language of the ADA, expressly covering "fringe benefits,"
and the Act's legislative history, rejecting the concept of a "safe
harbor" for pre-ADA plans, make plain congressional intent that the
Betts approach not be applied in the context of the ADA.
11.     See Morgado v. Birmingham-Jefferson County Civil Defense
Corps., 706 F.2d 1184, 1189 (11th Cir. 1983, cert. denied, 464 U.S.
1045 (1984) (employer relying on Equal Pay Act provision allowing pay
differentials for reasons other than sex must prove entitlement to
provision's protection because such facts "are peculiarly within the
knowledge of the employer"); EEOC v. Whitin Machine Works, Inc., 635
F.2d 1095, 1097 (4th Cir. 1980) (when facts are "within [the] unique
knowledge" of the employer, it bears burden of proof concerning those
facts); EEOC v. Radiator Specialty Co., 610 F.2d 178, 185 n. 8 (4th
Cir. 1979) ("general principle of allocation of proof to the party
with the most ready access to the relevant
information" requires Title VII defendant to show inappropriateness
of labor pool statistics).
12.     See footnote 3, supra, for a discussion of the difference
between "insured" and "self-insured" insurance plans.
13.     The term "applicable state law" refers both to the
determination of: 1) which state's laws are applicable to the
particular charge (e.g., which state's laws are applicable in the
event that the health insurance policy was drawn up in accordance
with the laws of the state of Maryland, but the insured employee
resides in the state of Virginia) and 2) which laws of that
appropriate state are relevant to the particular charge.  With
respect to health insurance plans that are MEWAs, applicable state
law is determined with reference to ERISA section 514 (b)(6)(A).
Questions concerning the "applicable state law" should be directed to
the Regional Attorney.
14.     Actuarial data that is seriously outdated and/or inaccurate
is not legitimate actuarial data.  The respondent, for example, will
not be able to rely on actuarial data about a disability that is
based on myths, fears, or stereotypes about the disability.  Nor will
a respondent be able to rely on actuarial data that is based on false
assumptions about disability, or on assumptions that may have once
been, but are no longer, true.  For example, a respondent would not
be able to justify an exclusion of epilepsy from its insurance plan
that is based on an erroneous assumption that people with epilepsy
are more likely to have serious accidents (and thus file more claims
for insurance benefits) than are individuals who do not have
epilepsy.
15.     Risk classification refers to the identification of risk
factors and the grouping of those factors that pose similar risks.
Risk factors may include characteristics such as age, occupation,
personal habits (e.g., smoking), and medical history.  Underwriting
refers to the application of the various risk factors or risk classes
to a particular individual or group (usually only if the group is
small) for the purpose of determining whether to provide insurance.
16.     Adverse selection is the tendency of people who represent
poorer-than-average health risks to apply for and/or retain health
insurance to a greater extent than people who represent average or
above average health risks.  Drastic increases in premiums and/or
drastic decreases in insurance benefits foster an increase in adverse
selection, as those who are considered to be "good" insurance risks
drop out and seek enrollment in an insurance plan with lower premiums
and/or better benefits.  An insurance plan that is subjected to a
significant rate of adverse selection may, as a result of the
increase in the proportion of "poor risk/high use" enrollees to "good
risk/low use" enrollees, become not viable or financially unsound.
17.     However, the respondent may be found to have violated the ADA
if the evidence reveals that the respondent's health insurance plan
covers treatments for other conditions that are likewise of no
medical value.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov