National Origin Discrimination | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
National Origin Discrimination
National Origin Discrimination
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 protects employees or applicants from discrimination based on his or her national origin,
including Americans
.
National origin discrimination involves treating workers (applicants or employees) unfavorably or favorably because they are from a particular country or part of the world, because of ethnicity or accent, or because they appear to be of a certain ethnic background (even if they are not).
National origin discrimination can include
preferring foreign workers
, including
workers with a particular visa status
, over American workers.
National origin discrimination also can involve treating people unfavorably because they are married to (or associated with) a person of a certain national origin.
Discrimination can occur when the victim and the person who inflicted the discrimination are of the same national origin.
You can report national origin discrimination to the EEOC via the
EEOC Public Portal
.  Depending on the facts, the same conduct giving rise to a potential violation of Title VII also may violate other laws enforced by other U.S. government agencies –
see below.
National Origin Discrimination & Work Situations
Title VII forbids discrimination when it comes to any aspect of employment, including hiring, firing, pay, job assignments, promotions, layoff, training, fringe benefits, and any other term or condition of employment.
Pay discrimination related to national origin can include an employer paying employees who are visa guest workers (including workers on H-1B visas, H-2A visas, etc.) less than similarly situated American workers.
Discriminatory Job Advertisements
Title VII bars discriminatory job advertisements.  This can include job ads that say the employer prefers or requires applicants from a particular country or with a particular visa status (for example,
“H-1B preferred” or “H-1B only”
).
National origin-related disparate treatment in hiring related to job advertisement also can include an employer making it more difficult for applicants from one national origin to apply for positions (for example, subjecting U.S. workers to more laborious application methods than H-1B visa holders during the PERM labor certification process).
National Origin & Harassment
It is unlawful to harass a person because of his or her national origin. Harassment can include, for example, offensive or derogatory remarks about a person's national origin, accent, or ethnicity. Although the law does not prohibit simple teasing, offhand comments, or isolated incidents that are not very serious, harassment is illegal when it is so frequent or severe that it creates a hostile or offensive work environment or when it results in an adverse employment decision (such as the victim being fired or demoted).
The harasser can be the victim's supervisor, a supervisor in another area, a co-worker, or someone who is not an employee of the employer, such as a client or customer.
Common Business Reasons Do Not Justify National Origin Discrimination
The following considerations do not excuse an employer’s preference for workers from one national origin group over another (including preferring foreign workers over American workers):
Lower cost labor (whether due to payment “under the table,” or abusing rules around certain visa-holder wage requirements, etc.);
Customer or client preference;
Beliefs that workers from one or more national origin groups are more productive or have a better work ethic.
Misconduct Involving National Origin Discrimination Also May Violate Other Laws
You can report discriminatory job advertisements preferring visa workers over U.S. workers to both
EEOC
(for a violation of Title VII) and the
Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division
(for a violation of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA)).
For other disparate treatment in hiring, firing, recruitment, or other terms or conditions of employment involving both national origin and citizenship status, visa status, or immigration status, you can report this to both
EEOC
(for a violation of Title VII) and the
Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division
(for a violation of the INA or the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA)).
You can report under-payment of visa workers compared to comparable U.S. workers (including via wage-level misclassification) to three agencies:
EEOC
(for a violation of Title VII’s prohibition on pay discrimination motivated by national origin);
Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division
(for a violation of visa program requirements)
Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division
(for a violation of the INA)
You can report an employer for not following other visa program requirements including those for D-1, E-3, H-1B, H-1B1, H-1C, H-2A, and H-2B visas, by
contacting
the
Wage and Hour Division
of the U.S. Department of Labor.
You can report fraud in the visa procurement process by
contacting
the
Fraud Detection and National Security Directorate
of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services within the Department of Homeland Security.
You can direct claims that a business employs workers who do not have permission to work in the United States to
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
.
You can report human trafficking to
the National Human Trafficking Hotline
if you or someone else is being forced or coerced to do work, including as part of a temporary visa program.
Translate this Page
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
English
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Español (Spanish)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
Português (Portuguese)
ไทย (Thai)
Report a Violation
EEOC Public Portal
Employer Coverage
15 or more employees
Time Limits
180 days to
file a charge
(may be extended by state laws)
Federal employees have 45 days to
contact an EEO counselor
Fact Sheet
Discrimination Against American Workers Is Against The Law
For More Information
Chair’s Priority – Protecting American Workers from Anti-American Bias
EEOC Releases New and Updated Educational Materials on National Origin Discrimination
EEOC Acting Chair Vows to Protect American Workers from Anti-American Bias | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Department of Labor -
Project Firewall
Department of Labor –
H-1B Compliance
Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division –
Protecting U.S. Workers Initiative
Enforcement Guidance on National Origin Discrimination
EEOC Enforcement Statistics
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
Regulations: 29 C.F.R. Part 1606
Support for Victims of Trafficking and Violence
EEOC Procedures: Requests for EEOC Declarations for T Nonimmigrant Classification (T Visa) Petition…
EEOC Procedures: Requesting EEOC Certification for U Nonimmigrant Classification (U Visa) Petitions…
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov