Other Employment and Civil Rights Laws Not Enforced by the EEOC | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Other Employment and Civil Rights Laws Not Enforced by the EEOC
Other Employment and Civil Rights Laws Not Enforced by the EEOC
The EEOC does not enforce the following laws prohibiting discrimination or regulating other employment-related issues.
Section 1981 of the Civil Rights Act of 1866
Section 1981, which is codified at 42 U.S.C. 1981, protects the equal right of all persons to make and enforce contracts without respect to race. The law covers all contractual aspects of the employment relationship, such as hiring, discharge, and the terms and conditions of employment, and protects against retaliation. It applies to all private employers and labor organizations, but not federal, state, or local government employers. Section 1981 is enforced by individuals, not a federal agency.
National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) of 1935
The NLRA protects workers who wish to form, join, or support unions, or who are already represented by unions, and workers who join together as a group (two or more employees) without a union seeking to modify their wages or working conditions. For more information, contact the
National Labor Relations Board
.
Social Security Act (SSA) of 1935
The SSA established Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) for certain individuals with severe disabilities who can no longer work, using a different definition of disability than that used in the ADA. For more information, contact the U.S.
Social Security Administration
.
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938
The FLSA provides workers with minimum wage, overtime pay, and child labor protections, covering most, but not all, private and public sector employees. The
Equal Pay Act
, which is enforced by the EEOC, was created as an amendment to the FLSA in 1963. For more information, contact the
Wage and Hour Division
of the U.S. Department of Labor.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
Title VI prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin in any program or activity that receives federal funds or federal financial assistance, including employment. For more information, contact the
Federal Coordination and Compliance Section
in the U.S. Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division.
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act) of 1970
This law sets out safety requirements for workplaces. The
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
in the U.S. Department of Labor works with states to investigate and enforce OSHA requirements.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972
Title IX prohibits sex discrimination in any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance, including employment. For more information, contact the
Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
at the U.S. Department of Education.
Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA) of 1978
The CSRA prohibits discrimination against federal job applicants or employees on the bases of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, or disability, as well as marital status and political association. It also prohibits retaliation. The CSRA led to the creation of four federal agencies: the
Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB)
handles employee appeals regarding prohibited personnel practices; the
Office of Special Counsel (OSC)
investigates allegations of prohibited personnel practices, prosecutes violators of civil service rules, and enforces the Hatch Act; the
Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA)
oversees federal labor-management relations (for non-postal employees); and the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
manages the federal work force.
Antidiscrimination Provision of the Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) of 1986
This law prohibits citizenship status and national origin discrimination with respect to hiring, firing, or recruitment or referral for a fee, and unfair documentary practices during the employment eligibility verification process. For more information, contact the
Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER)
of the U.S. Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division.
Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990
This law makes it illegal to discriminate against people with disabilities in all programs, activities, and services offered by state and local government agencies, including employment practices. For employment-related matters, the EEOC’s ADA Title I regulations apply to Title II entities. For more information, contact the
Disability Rights Section
of the U.S. Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division.
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993
The FMLA entitles certain employees to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave during a 12-month period because of a "serious health condition" that they or someone in their family is experiencing. Certain other employees caring for a family member who is a covered servicemember with a serious injury or illness may be eligible for up to 26 weeks of leave. FMLA leave can sometimes overlap with Title VII and/or ADA and Rehabilitation Act requirements.  For more information, contact the
Wage and Hour Division
of the U.S. Department of Labor.
Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998
The WIA was enacted to consolidate, coordinate, and improve employment, training, literacy, and vocational rehabilitation programs in the United States. It is enforced by the
Employment and Training Administration
of the Department of Labor.
Title I of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) of 2008
Title I of GINA prohibits discrimination in group health plan coverage based on genetic information. Title I is enforced by three different federal agencies. For more information, contact the
Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA)
at the U.S. Department of Labor or the
Office of Civil Rights (OCR)
at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Workers Compensation Laws
Workers compensation
may provide cash benefits or medical care for workers who suffer an injury or become ill due to their workplace. Each
state has a workers’ compensation program
. In addition, the federal government administers four major disability compensation programs for federal workers (or their dependents) or other specific groups who are injured at work or who acquire an occupational disease. These programs typically provide compensation for on-the-job injuries and illnesses and may provide medical treatment, vocational rehabilitation, and other benefits. Some programs require employers to provide job modifications, which also may be ADA reasonable accommodations. For more information about federal workers compensation programs, contact the
Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP)
at the U.S. Department of Labor.
Enabled In-page Navigation
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov