Policy Statement: Differences in the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Policy Statement: Differences in the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel
Policy Statement:  Differences in the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1988-4
Concise Display Name
Policy Statement:  Differences in the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel
Issue Date
02-05-1988
General Topics
Pay Discrimination
Summary
This document addresses the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel between men and women performing equal work.
Citation
Title VII, EPA, 29 CFR Part 1604, 29 CFR Part 1620
Document Applicant
Employers, Employees, Applicants, Attorneys and Practitioners, EEOC Staff
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
N-915.021
February 5, 1988
SUBJECT
: Policy Statement: Differences in the payment of reimbursable expenses for    travel.
PURPOSE
: This policy statement reflects the Commissions position in cases involving differences in the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel between men and women          performing equal work.
EFFECTIVE DATE:
February 5, 1988
EXPIRATION DATE
: August 5, 1988
ORIGINATOR
: Title VII/EPA Division, Office of Legal Counsel.
INSTRUCTIONS
: File behind Section 701.
SUBJECT MATTER
:
An employer may not differentiate between men and women in the payment of reimbursable expenses for travel. Travel expenses are wages and, pursuant to the Equal Pay Act (EPA), an employer must provide both sexes equal remuneration for equal work.
[1]
The Equal Pay Act does not define wages, but the legislation that it amended, the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA), does. Section 203(m) of the Fair Labor Standards Act states that the [w]age paid to any employee includes the reasonable cost . . . to the employer of furnishing such employee with board, lodging, or other facilities, if such board, lodging, or other facilities are customarily furnished by such employer to his employees... Since travel expenses include lodging and board while traveling on business, the plain meaning of §203(m) includes travel expenses as wages.
Congress has made it clear that definitions and interpretations already utilized in applications of the Fair Labor Standards Act should be utilized in applying the Equal Pay Act. The House Report on the Equal Pay Act stated:
The bill (H.R. 6060) would add one additional fair labor standard to the act; namely, that employees doing equal work should be paid equal wages, regardless of sex. Because of the long history and experience of Government and business workers under the Fair Labor Standards Act, a simple expansion of that act to include the equal pay concept offers the most efficient and least difficult course of action. The Fair Labor Standards Act has been on our statute books now for almost a quarter of a century.... Such utilization serves two purposes: First, it eliminates the need for a new bureaucratic structure to enforce equal pay legislation; and second, compliance should be made easier because both industry and labor have a long-established familiarity with existing fair labor standards provisions.
H.R. Rep. No. 309, 88th Cong., 1
st
Sess. (1963), U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News 1963, pp. 687, 688.
Pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1978 (43 F.R. 19807) and Executive Order No. 12144 (44 F.R. 37193), responsibility for enforcement of the Equal Pay Act was transferred from the Department of Labor to the EEOC. In 1986 the EEOC published its final interpretations of the Equal Pay Act, which defined wages as follows:
Under the EPA, the term "wages" generally includes all payments made to [or on behalf of] an employee as remuneration for employment. The term includes all forms of compensation... whether called wages, salary, profit sharing,
expense account
, monthly minimum, bonus,
uniform cleaning allowance
, hotel accommodations, use of company car,
gas allowance
, or some other name.
Interpretations of the Equal Pay Act, 29 C.F.R. S 1620.10. (emphasis added).
The Commission position is in accord with the current case law in the
Laffey
series of cases. In
Laffey v. Northwest Airlines
, 567 F. 2d 429, 12 EPD 11216 (D.C. Cir. 1976),
cert. denied
, 434 U.S. 1086, 16 EPD 8140 (1978) [hereafter
Laffey
I], the court held that the airline violated equal pay provisions by providing less expensive and less desirable layover accommodations to female employees than to male employees. Although the payments for lodging were made directly to the hotels and not to the employees as reimbursement, such payments constituted wages within the meaning of the Equal Pay Act. Also, the practice of providing uniform cleaning allowances to male but not female flight attendants violated equal pay provisions.
Laffey v. Northwest Airlines, Inc
., 642 F.2d 578, 24 EPD § 31288 (D.C. Cir. 1980), [hereafter
Laffey
II] held that, generally, layover provisions for rooms and uniform allowances fall into the category of allowances for the benefit of the employer (non-wages). However, where males are given allowances in excess of those given to females, the allowance cannot be said to be in the interests of the employer. If the allowances were in the employer's interest, he would provide them to females as well as males. Therefore, the discriminatory layover provisions and uniform allowances violated equal pay provisions.
In
Laffey v. Northwest Airlines, Inc
., 740 F. 2d 1071, 34 EPD 34540 (D.C. Cir. 1984),
cert. denied
, 105 S.Ct. 939, 35 EPD 34855 (1985), the court upheld
Laffey I
and
Laffey II
determinations that the uniform cleaning allowances were simply another supplement to male salaries and constituted wages under the Equal Pay Act. The clear import of the
Laffey
cases is that travel expenses are considered wages under the Equal Pay Act.
CHARGE RESOLUTION
When charges are received alleging Equal Pay Act violations based on the payment of unequal travel expenses between men and women performing equal work, the charge should be analyzed and investigated in the same manner as charges alleging unequal pay for equal work.
2-5-1988
____________________                                            Approved:            _________________
Date                                                                                                    Clarence Thomas
Chairman
[1]
Differences in the payment of reimbursable travel expenses are also prohibited y Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, (Title VII) and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA). Title VII makes it unlawful for employers to discriminate against individuals with respect to compensation because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. The ADEA makes it illegal for an employer to discriminate against an individual with respect to compensation because of his/her age.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov