Policy Statement: Specific Exemptions from coverage pursuant to sec. 9 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Policy Statement: Specific Exemptions from coverage pursuant to sec. 9 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
Policy Statement:  Specific Exemptions from coverage pursuant to sec. 9 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1988-2
Concise Display Name
Policy Statement:  Specific Exemptions from coverage pursuant to sec. 9 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
Issue Date
01-20-1988
General Topics
Age
Summary
This document addresses the exemptions from ADEA coverage for "Special Employment Plans"
Citation
ADEA, 29 CFR Part 1625
Document Applicant
Employers, Employees, Applicants, Attorneys and Practitioners, EEOC Staff
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
N-915
January 20, 1988
1.
SUBJECT
:  Policy Statement:  Specific Exemptions from coverage pursuant to § 9 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967, as amended.  Activities and programs under federal contracts or grants, as carried out by the several States, designed exclusively for individuals with special employment problems as set forth in § 1627.16 of the Commission's Regulations.
2.
PURPOSE
:  This Statement provides information on the nature and scope of the specific exemptions from ADEA coverage provided for certain activities and programs designed to provide or encourage the employment of persons with special employment problems pursuant to § 9 of the ADEA and as delineated in § 1627.16, 29 C.F.R. Part 1627 of the Commission's Interpretive Regulations.  This Statement is also intended to provide information on the evaluation and processing of cases under the ADEA where the respondent alleges that it is entitled to a specific exemption.
3.
EFFECTIVE DATE
:  Upon receipt.
4.
ORIGINATOR
:  ADEA Division, Office of Legal Counsel.
5.
INSTRUCTIONS
:  File after the last Policy Statement in the 800 series of Volume II of the Compliance Manual.
6.
SUBJECT MATTER
:
(a)
Introduction
- This Policy Statement reflects the Commission's position on the nature and scope of the specific exemption found at § 1627.16 of the Commission's Regulations and its position on the processing of cases involving the exemption under the ADEA of 1967, as amended.
(b)
Statutory Provision
- Section 9 of the ADEA provides:
In accordance with the provisions of subchapter II of Chapter 5, United States Code, the Secretary of Labor [EEOC] may issue such rules and regulations as [it] may consider necessary or appropriate for carrying out this Act, and may establish such reasonable exemptions to and from any or all provisions of this Act as [it] may find necessary and proper in the public interest.
(c)
Purpose of § 9
- Section 9, in pertinent part, reflects a congressional intent to allow for discretionary action by the Commission in establishing reasonable exemptions from the provisions of the Act where it has been clearly shown that such exemptions are in fact necessary and proper in the public interest.  This section makes it possible, when necessary, for the Commission to strike a balance between the rights of individuals age 40 and over to be free from arbitrary employment discrimination and other kinds of policies, programs, or activities designed and implemented in the public interest.
(d)
Commission Regulations
- The regulation found at 29 C.F.R. § 1627.15 sets forth the procedures that must be followed by the Commission when using its exemption authority under § 9 of the ADEA.  Section 1627.16 is representative of one such use of the exemption authority where it has been decided that it is necessary and proper in the public interest to exclude specified employment practices of certain employers from coverage under the Act.
(1)
Section 1627.15 Administrative exemptions; procedures
- This section of the regulations provides that the Commission will exercise with caution its authority under § 9 of the Act to establish reasonable exemptions.  Furthermore, the Commission in deciding whether to grant an exemption shall always consider the remedial purpose of the statute to promote employment of older persons based on their ability rather than age and to prohibit arbitrary employment discrimination based on age.  A decision by the Commission to grant an exemption under § 1627.15 may be unilateral or pursuant to a request, when it is determined that such action is necessary and proper in the public interest.  The section does not establish any formal procedures for requesting such action.  However, it is made clear that an exemption will only be granted subsequent to adequate public notice in the Federal Register and analysis of the comments received.  If a request for an exemption is made under § 1627.15, it must be submitted in writing to the Commission.
(2)
Section 1627.16 Specific exemptions
- This section of the regulations provides that, pursuant to § 9 of the ADEA and the necessary procedures set forth in § 1627.15 (See 6(d) (1) above), it has been found to be in the public interest to exempt from all prohibitions of the Act all activities and programs under Federal contracts or grants, or carried out by the public employment services of the several States, that are designed exclusively to provide employment for, or to encourage the employment of, individuals with special employment problems.  Included in the types of programs and activities exempted are those under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended, and the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, as amended (programs listed as examples, not limitations).  The exemption further defines persons with special employment problems as those individuals who are among the long- term unemployed, handicapped, members of minority groups, older workers, or youth.  The exemption mandates that all questions concerning the application of the exemption are to be referred to the Commission for decision.
If a covered employer is utilizing a program or activity that is exempt under this section from the provisions of the ADEA, such employer nevertheless is required to maintain and preserve records containing the same information and data required of other covered employers under the Act.
(e)
Case Resolution
- The most important question to be addressed in every case under the ADEA involving a claim by an employer or other covered entity that it is entitled to one of the specific exemptions set forth in § 1627.16 is whether such employer or entity is currently participating in an activity or program under a federal contract or grant, or carried out by the public employment services of the several States, designed
exclusively
to provide employment for, or to encourage the employment of, individuals with
special employment problems
.  The Commission takes the position that the burden of producing evidence sufficient to establish the exemption, like any other affirmative defense, is on the employer or other covered entity seeking to invoke it.  Field office staff consultation is imperative in those situations where the respondent has not supplied sufficient evidence to clearly establish that it was participating in a program or activity similar or the same in all aspects as the programs or activities described in § 1625.16 and this Policy Statement.
Each request for a determination on the applicability of the § 1627.16 exemption must be processed on its own peculiar facts.  The processing of charges/complaints involving § 1627.16 should proceed as follows:
(1)       The employer seeking to invoke an exemption under § 1627.16 of the regulations has the burden of showing that it comes within the exception and is thus exempt from all prohibitions of the Act; and
(2)       Such employer may make this showing by producing evidence of the following:
(i)     A federal contract,
(ii)     A federal grant, or
(iii)     Activities or programs carried out or sponsored by the public employment services of the several states, any one or a combination of which must be designed exclusively to provide employment for, or to encourage the employment of, persons with special employment problems;
(3)       An employer or covered entity alleging involvement in activities or programs that qualify for the exemption should be requested to produce a certification or contract document from the Federal or State agency that administers the contracts or grants; such agencies or employment services may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i)     Employment and Training Administration (ETA), United States Department of Labor;
(ii)     Office of Job Training Programs, United States Department of Labor;
(iii)     Office of Vocational and Adult Education, United States Department of Education;
(iv)     United States Employment Services (USES), United States Department of Labor;
(v)     United States Department of Health and Human Services;
(vi)     Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS), United States Department of Labor; or
(vii)     The Department of Employment Services for a particular state;
(4)       Specific information on the activity or program in which the employer or covered entity is involved is necessary to a determination of whether said employer or covered entity is exempt under the ADEA; for example, is the activity or program identical or similar to those under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962, as amended, or the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, as amended.
NOTE:  Although specifically mentioned in § 1627.16 of the interpretative regulations, the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962 and the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, as amended, have expired and have been replaced by the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) of 1982.  The essential objectives of the JTPA are to train or retrain and find employment for the persons who qualify under that Act.  Qualified individuals are those persons defined as economically disadvantaged, particularly disadvantaged youth, who are traditionally among the unemployed.
Under the JTPA, the Secretary of Labor awards block grants to the several states and the District of Columbia as well as certain United States possessions.  The Department of Labor has promulgated implementing regulations for the JTPA which can be found in 20 C.F.R. Parts 626-638 and 675-684.
The following types of programs or activities, although some are now non-functional, are representative of those intended to be exempt from coverage under § 1627.16:
(i)     Neighborhood Youth Corps;
(ii)     Work Incentive (WIN) Program;
(iii)     Job Corps;
(iv)     Public Service Careers;
(v)     Operation Mainstream; and
(vi)     CETA.
Employees in these types of programs have traditionally received basic education courses; work experience; counseling; testing; on-the-job and skills training; vocational rehabilitation; medical, dental and eye care; transportation; use of day care centers; and a variety of other supportive services which are designed to enhance their employability.  The referenced criteria set out in this paragraph are for illustrative purposes only and are intended to provide examples of the types and purposes of programs which are made exempt by § 1627.16.
This information may be useful when confronted with a program or activity operated by a respondent that receives funds directly from a federal agency, grant, or state employment service and at the same time is responsible for the direct hiring of individuals with special employment problems.  This is in contrast to those programs or activities where the state agencies provide the names of individuals to the contractor or employer and that contractor or employer must hire only from that pool of individuals.
(5)       Even though an employer or other covered entity is granted an exemption under § 1627.16, the employer or entity should be maintaining records containing the same information and data that is required of employers and other covered entities that are not exempt from the prohibitions of the Act.  See, §§ 1627.3, 1627.4, and 1627.5 of the interpretative regulations.
(6)       The exemption is only available with regard to the specific activity or program aiding employees who have been certified as individuals with special employment problems.
Example
- Charging Party alleges that she was discriminatorily denied employment because of her age (65) by Respondent Employer.  Specifically, CP applied for one of 10 positions that R had identified as being reserved for youth with special employment problems.  R maintains that the 10 positions were only to be filled with individuals referred to it by the State Office of Employment Services.  R further contends that it has a contract which establishes its relationship with the State Employment Office and as such it is also exempt from coverage under the ADEA regarding the 10 designated positions.  The Commission would probably conclude that R is entitled to the specific exemption that is set forth at § 1627.16, 29 C.F.R. Part 1627 regarding the 10 positions in question.
Note:  The result would be different if CP had applied for a job that was not included in the 10 designated positions under the contract with the State Employment Office.  In that case, the prohibitions of the ADEA would apply.  On the other hand, if R had been participating in a program or activity in which it received funding directly from a federal or state agency and such program or activity's sole or exclusive purpose was to employ individuals with special employment problems in every available position, its actions may be exempt under § 1627.16.
DATED:
January 20, 1988
APPROVED:______________________
Clarence Thomas
Chairman
July 3, 1989
1.
SUBJECT
:  Policy Statement:  Specific exemptions from coverage pursuant to § 9 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 as amended.  Activities and programs under federal contracts or grants, as carried out by the several States, designed exclusively for individuals with special employment problems as set forth in § 1627.16 of the Commission's Regulations.
2.
PURPOSE
:  This Notice continues in effect Notice N-915, dated January 20, 1988, until rescinded or superseded.  This Statement provides information on the nature and scope of the specific exemptions from ADEA coverage provided for certain activities and programs designed to provide or encourage the employment of persons with special employment problems pursuant to § 9 of the ADEA and as delineated in § 1627.16, 29 C.F.R. Part 1627 of the Commission's Interpretive Regulations.  This Statement is also intended to provide information on the evaluation and processing of cases under the ADEA where the respondent alleges that it is entitled to a specific exemption.
3.
ORIGINATOR
:  ADEA Division, Office of Legal Counsel.
4.
EFFECTIVE DATE
:  Upon receipt; as an exception to EEOC Order 205.001, Appendix B, Attachment 4, § a(5), this Notice will remain in effect until rescinded or superseded.
Approved: ____
/s/
_________________
Clarence Thomas
Chairman
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov