Policy Guidance: Circumstances under which the award of prejudgment interest is appropriate | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Policy Guidance: Circumstances under which the award of prejudgment interest is appropriate
Policy Guidance:  Circumstances under which the award of prejudgment interest is appropriate
Issuing Authority
This guidance document was issued upon approval by vote of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-CVG-1990-19
Concise Display Name
Policy Guidance:  Circumstances under which the award of prejudgment interest is appropriate
Issue Date
08-29-1990
General Topics
Remedies
Summary
This document addresses the circumstances in which prejudgment interest and liquidated damages may be awarded concurrently.
Citation
Title VII, ADEA, 29 CFR Part 1601, 29 CFR Part 1625, 29 CFR Part 1614
Document Applicant
Employers, Employees, Applicants, Attorneys and Practitioners, EEOC Staff
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
NOTICE
N-915.059
August 29, 1990
1.
SUBJECT
: Policy Guidance: Circumstances under which the award of prejudgment interest is appropriate.
2.
PURPOSE
: This Policy Guidance provides information on the circumstances under which prejudgment interest and liquidated damages may be awarded concurrently.
3.
EFFECTIVE DATE
: Upon Receipt.
4.
EXPIRATION DATE
: As an exception to EEOC Order 205.001, Appendix B, Attachment 4, sec. a(5), this Notice will remain in effect until rescinded or superseded.
5.
ORIGINATOR
: ADEA Division, Office of Legal Counsel.
6.
INSTRUCTIONS
: File after the last Policy Guidance in the 800 series of Volume II of the Compliance Manual.
7.
SUBJECT MATTER
:
(a)
Statutory Provisions
?
Section 7(b) of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), 29 U.S.C. sec. 626(b), provides the remedies available to enforce the ADEA. Section 7(b) adopts by reference many of the enforcement provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938, as amended (FLSA), 29 U.S.C. 211
et
seq
., including (but not limited to) back pay, front pay, and liquidated damages. A major difference between the ADEA and the FLSA is that liquidated damages under the ADEA can
be applied "only in cases of willful violations of this Act" while such damages are, according to the Supreme Court, mandatory under the FLSA.
(b)
Discussion
?
In
Hansard v. Pepsi?Cola Metropolitan Bottling Co.
, 865 F.2d 1461, 1470?71 (5th Cir. 1989), the Fifth Circuit, citing numerous cases from the Fifth and other circuits, stated:
All of the courts that have addressed the issue have concluded that prejudgment interest should be awarded to ADEA plaintiffs who are not awarded liquidated damages. The primary rationale for this conclusion is that unlawful discrimination
deprives an employee of his salary as well as the
use
of that salary during the interim period. Thus, awarding prejudgment interest is consistent with the purpose of the ADEA,
i.e.
, making the plaintiff whole.
(Extensive citations omitted; emphasis in the original.)
The question to be decided in this Policy Guidance is whether prejudgment interest
[1]
can be awarded when "liquidated damages" (
i.e.
, double damages in cases of willful
violations of the ADEA) are also awarded.
[2]
In
Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Thurston
, 469 U.S. 111 (1985), the Supreme Court analyzed in depth the appropriate definition of "willful" for purposes of the ADEA's liquidated damages provision. In its analysis, at 125, the Court held
that the enforcement provisions of the ADEA and the FLSA were intended by Congress to be different regarding the awarding of liquidated damages. The Court stated that "[t]he legislative history of the ADEA indicates that Congress intended for
liquidated damages to be punitive in nature. The original bill proposed by the administration incorporated section 16(a) of the FLSA, which imposes criminal liability for a willful violation." The Court indicated that Congress had rejected the FLSA
approach for the ADEA, deciding not to provide criminal penalties under the ADEA because "difficult problems of proof. . . would arise under a criminal provision. . ." With respect to the double damage liability offered as a substitute, "Senator
Javits argued that his proposed amendment would furnish an effective deterrent to willful violations. . .and it was incorporated into the ADEA with only minor modification." The Court did not address the issue of whether or not a court could award
both prejudgment interest and liquidated damages under the ADEA.
Prior to the
Thurston
decision, most circuits had determined that prejudgment interest and liquidated damages could not be available concurrently. The Tenth Circuit's holding in
Blim v. Western Electric Co., Inc.
, 731 F.2d 1473,
1479 (10th Cir. 1984), is typical of the pre?
Thurston
holdings:
In
Brooklyn Bank v. O'Neil
, 324 U.S. 697, 715 (1945), the Supreme Court held that prejudgment interest was not available under the Fair Labor Standards Act because liquidated damages, which at that time were mandatory under the FLSA,
compensated plaintiffs for any delay. The ADEA incorporates. . .the FLSA provision for liquidated damages. . . . Thus, we agree with the circuits that still regard
Brooklyn Bank
as pertinent and hold that prejudgment interest is not available
under the ADEA if plaintiffs receive liquidated damages.
In light of
Thurston
, some of the circuits have reconsidered their previous holdings and have held that prejudgment interest and liquidated damages could be imposed concurrently. The Second Circuit's holding in
Reichman v. Bonsignore,
Brignati & Mazzotta
P.C.
, 818 F.2d 278 (2d Cir. 1987) is an example:
In an ADEA case, prejudgment interest is designed to compensate the plaintiff for loss of the use of money wrongfully withheld through an unlawful discharge. However, other circuits have refused to allow prejudgment interest on compensatory
damages that are coupled with liquidated damages on the theory that the liquidated damages compensate the plaintiff for "losses that cannot be calculated with certainty. . . .On this view, awarding both prejudgment interest and liquidated damages
would provide a double recovery. The Supreme Court has recently held [in
Thurston
], however, that liquidated damages under the ADEA are punitive in nature. Rather than serving to compensate the victim, they are designed to deter willful
violations.
On the other hand, several circuits, post-
Thurston,
have declined to alter their views. In
Linn v. Andover Newton
Theological School, Inc.
, 874 F.2d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 1989), the First Circuit, while not ruling on the issue
(since the plaintiff had requested
either
liquidated damages or prejudgment interest, but not both), stated at n. 9:
We note, however, that it is far from clear to us that our [pre?
Thurston
] decision. . .must be abandoned.
Thurston
dealt only tangentially with the precise issue before us here. Moreover the relevant portion of that opinion was
quite brief . . . . In short, we will not lightly presume that the Court intended to overrule,
sub silentio
, a view held by virtually every circuit to have considered the issue.
(c)
Current Position of the Circuits
?
First Circuit
: In
Linn
, the First Circuit, while not specifically deciding the issue, indicated that it was not favorably inclined toward permitting both forms of relief concurrently.
Second Circuit
: In
Reichman
, the Second Circuit decided that both forms of relief could be granted.
Third Circuit
: While in
Blum v. Witco Chemical Corp.
, 829 F.2d 367, 382 (3d Cir. 1987), the court held that the calculation of liquidated damages could not serve to double the front pay award, the court has been silent on the issue
of liquidated damages and prejudgment interest. In
Gelof v. Papineau
, 648 F.Supp. 912, 929 (D.Del. 1986),
rev'd. on other grounds
, 829 F.2d 452 (3d Cir. 1987), the trial court held in dictum that an award of liquidated damages
precluded an award of prejudgment interest. Since at trial the court had determined that liquidated damages were not appropriate, the issue of permitting both forms of relief concurrently was not reached on appeal.
Fourth Circuit
: In
Hamilton v. 1st Source Bank
, 51 FEP 1874, 1879 (4th Cir. 1990), the Fourth Circuit determined that an award of liquidated damages precluded an award of prejudgment interest.
Fifth Circuit
: In
Burns v. Texas City Refining, Inc.
, 51 FEP 1029, 1033?34 (5th Cir. 1989), the Fifth Circuit decided that the two forms of relief could not be awarded together.
Sixth Circuit
: In
Rose v. National Cash Register Corp.
, 703 F.2d 225, 230 (6th Cir. 1983),
cert. den.
, 464 U.S. 939 (1984), the court followed
Brooklyn Bank
. However,
Rose
is also a pre-
Thurston
case.
Seventh Circuit
: In
EEOC v. O'Grady
, 857 F.2d 383, 391 at n. 13 (7th Cir. 1988), a post-
Thurston
case, the court, citing
Coston v. Plitt Theatres, Inc.
, 831 F.2d 1321, 1335?37 (7th Cir. 1987),
vacated on other
grounds
, 108 S.Ct. 1990 (1988), stated that "A district court in this circuit may not award both prejudgment interest and liquidated damages in an ADEA action."
Eighth Circuit
: In
Gibson v. Mohawk Rubber Co.
, 695 F.2d 974, 979 (8th Cir. 1981), a pre-
Thurston
case, the court followed the
Brooklyn Bank
line of cases. In
Neufeld v. Searle Laboratories
, 884 F.2d 335, 341 at
n. 2 (8th Cir. 1989), the court held that: "On remand, the Court should reconsider its award of prejudgment interest. The plaintiff
may not
be entitled to both prejudgment interest and liquidated damages." (Emphasis supplied.) It is not
certain whether the words "may not" would indicate that the circuit is reconsidering its
Gibson
position in light of
Thurston
.
Ninth Circuit
: The Ninth Circuit, even before
Thurston
, held that the two forms of relief could be provided in the same case. See
Criswell v. Western Airlines
, 709 F.2d 544, 556?7 (9th Cir. 1983).
Tenth Circuit
: In
Blim v. Western Electric Co., Inc.
, 731 F.2d 1473, 1479 (10th Cir. 1984),
cert
.
den
. 469 U.S. 874 (1984), a pre-
Thurston
case, the Tenth Circuit followed
Brooklyn Bank
. The court has not
ruled on the issue since
Thurston
.
Eleventh Circuit
: In
Lindsey v. American Cast Iron Pipe Co.
, 810 F.2d 1094, 1102 (11th Cir. 1987), the Eleventh Circuit held that the two forms of relief could be provided in the same case.
The D.C. Circuit has not addressed the issue either before or after
Thurston
.
In summary, the Second, Ninth, and Eleventh Circuits have ruled that prejudgment interest and liquidated damages can be awarded in the same case. The Sixth, Eighth, and Tenth Circuits, which have followed
Brooklyn Bank
in the past, have
not addressed the issue after
Thurston
. The Fourth, Fifth, and Seventh Circuits have stated, post-
Thurston
, that the two forms of relief are mutually exclusive; the First Circuit has indicated that it will also rule in this manner. The
Third Circuit appears to have no position at this time.
(d)
Commission Position
: The Commission considers the positions taken by the Second, Ninth, and Eleventh Circuits to be the correct position. In light of the Supreme Court's holding in
Thurston
and the legislative history cited
therein, the Commission believes that it is permissible for a court to award both liquidated damages and prejudgment interest in the same case. The purpose of each relief is different; liquidated damages are awarded to punish an employer for willful
misconduct in its violation of the ADEA, while prejudgment interest is awarded to compensate the employee for the loss of the use of the money during the period of the discrimination.
A contrary rule, in the form adopted by the Fourth, Fifth, and Seventh Circuits, would dilute the deterrent effect of liquidated damages by exempting the employer who willfully violates the ADEA from the prejudgment interest for which it would
otherwise have been liable. Depending upon the length of time between the violation and the entry of judgment, this could be a significant benefit to the employer, a benefit which could make the sting of liquidated damages much less painful.
(e)
Case Resolution
?
In seeking relief in a case under the ADEA, the Commission will request, inter alia, backpay, prejudgment interest and, in cases involving willful violations, liquidated damages. However, in the Fourth, Fifth, and Seventh Circuits, which have
rejected (post?
Thurston
) simultaneous awards of prejudgment interest and liquidated damages, the Commission must follow the law of the circuit and not seek prejudgment interest if liquidated damages are awarded.
DATE:
August 29, 1990
APPROVED:__
/s/
_______________________
EVAN J. KEMP, JR.
Chairman
[1]
"Interest allowed by way of damages, as for the unlawful detention of money found to be due the plaintiff in action for breach of contract or tort." Ballantine's Law
Dictionary, Third Edition.
[2]
Prejudgment interest should be awarded in Title VII cases since liquidated damages are not available in such cases. However, since damages in Equal Pay Act cases are based
upon FLSA provisions, courts generally have held that prejudgment interest should not also be awarded when liquidated damages have been awarded.
See
,
e.g.
,
Hodgson v. Miller Brewing Co.
, 457 F.2d 221, 229 (7th Cir. 1972).
(
But see
Laffey v. Northwest Airlines, Inc.
, (Title VII/EPA) 740 F.2d 1071, 1102 (D.C. Cir. 1984),
cert. denied
, 469 U.S. 1181, in which an award of both liquidated damages and prejudgment interest was affirmed.)
Recent Equal Pay Act and FLSA cases have left open the possibility that some prejudgment interest could be awarded in a case in which less than the full amount of liquidated damages has been awarded.
See
Parker v. Burnley
, 703 F.
Supp. 925, 927 (N.D. Ga. 1988). Instruction on Equal Pay Act cases will be provided in a future policy guidance.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov