Questions And Answers: Policy Guidance On Executive Order 13164: Establishing Procedures To Facilitate The Provision Of Reasonable Accommodation | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Federal Sector
Questions And Answers: Policy Guidance On Executive Order 13164: Establishing Procedures To Facilitate The Provision Of Reasonable Accommodation
Questions And Answers: Policy Guidance On Executive Order 13164: Establishing Procedures To Facilitate The Provision Of Reasonable Accommodation
This Policy Guidance
explains the provisions of Executive Order 13164, which requires federal agencies to establish effective written procedures for processing requests for reasonable accommodation by employees and applicants with disabilities. The Guidance also provides background information on the requirements of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and sets forth instructions for implementing each of the procedural requirements of the Executive Order.
Who is covered by the Executive Order?
The Order applies to executive branch agencies and their employees and applicants for employment. It does not apply to employers or employees in the private sector.
What is reasonable accommodation?
Reasonable accommodation is a change in the work environment or in the application process that would enable a person with a disability to enjoy equal employment opportunities. There are three general categories of reasonable accommodations: (1) changes to a job application process to permit people with disabilities to be considered for jobs; (2) changes to enable people with disabilities to perform the essential functions of a job; and (3) changes to give people with disabilities equal access to the benefits and privileges of employment.
What are the legal requirements that govern an agency's obligation to provide reasonable accommodation?
Agencies must provide reasonable accommodation to qualified employees or applicants with disabilities unless the accommodation would create an undue hardship on the operation of the agency. A person with a disability is qualified for a job if s/he can perform the essential functions of that job with or without the reasonable accommodation.
For more guidance on the legal standards governing reasonable accommodation, agencies should consult the EEOC's
Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
, on the web at www.eeoc.gov.
Why is reasonable accommodation important?
While many people with disabilities can apply for and perform jobs without the need for reasonable accommodation, workplace barriers may keep others from entering the work force and still others from performing jobs which they could do with some form of accommodation. These barriers may be physical obstacles (such as inaccessible facilities or equipment), or they may be procedures or rules (such as rules concerning when work is performed, when breaks are taken, or how job tasks are to be done). Reasonable accommodation removes workplace barriers for people with disabilities. It also allows agencies to expand their pool of qualified workers.
Why are reasonable accommodation procedures important?
If a person with a disability needs a reasonable accommodation in order to do, or to apply for, his or her job, it is essential that federal agencies handle the request in a prompt, fair, and efficient manner. Establishing procedures in advance will assure that individuals with disabilities understand how to approach the system and know what to expect. Procedures will also help agency managers understand what is expected of them.
Does the Policy Guidance explain general standards for reasonable accommodation procedures?
Yes. While each agency will design its own procedures, all procedures must meet the following general standards:
The procedures must be flexible.
The procedures must be written in plain language.
The procedures must be designed to expand employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
The procedures must enable an agency to meet its obligations under the Rehabilitation Act.
How can a person with a disability start the reasonable accommodation process?
A person with a disability may start the process by making an oral or written request for a reasonable accommodation. Agencies must consider an individual's request if it is made to any of the following: his/her supervisor; a supervisor or manager in his/her immediate chain of command; the EEO office; any other office designated by the agency; or, in connection with the application process, any agency employee with whom the applicant has contact. An agency may not require people with disabilities to use particular words in their requests; nor may it wait to begin processing a request until a written form is submitted.
Which agency employees should be involved in considering an individual's request for reasonable accommodation?
Agency procedures should authorize first-line supervisors to consider and approve requests for reasonable accommodation wherever possible. Agencies may also designate particular offices to oversee the reasonable accommodation process and/or to provide assistance and information to all agency employees involved in the process.
Are there specific steps that all agencies must follow?
No. Each agency should design procedures that work best for its work force. All agency procedures should, however, require that agency decision makers talk to the individual requesting the accommodation where the person's specific disability or limitation is unclear; where an effective accommodation is not obvious; or where the parties are choosing between different possible reasonable accommodations.
What is the time period for processing requests?
Because the amount of time it takes to respond to a request for reasonable accommodation will often depend on the nature of the accommodation, the Guidance does not set specific time lines. Time limits should, however, be as short as reasonably possible. Where an accommodation is needed immediately -- where, for example, an applicant needs a modification to the application process in order to apply for a job -- the agency's procedures should also provide for expedited processing of the request.
What if an agency can't meet its time frames?
Sometimes there may be factors that an agency could not have anticipated or avoided that will delay the consideration or provision of a reasonable accommodation. In such circumstances, the agency must notify the individual of the reason for the delay and consider whether there are temporary measures that could be taken to assist the person with a disability until a decision on the requested accommodation can be made.
When may an agency ask for medical information in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation?
An agency is entitled to know that an individual has a covered disability that requires a reasonable accommodation. Therefore, the agency may ask for information about the disability, the activities it limits, and the need for accommodation -- but only if the disability and/or need for accommodation is not obvious, or if information already submitted by the individual is insufficient for the agency to make these determinations. An agency may not otherwise ask for medical information based on a person's request for a reasonable accommodation.
Must an agency keep medical information confidential?
Yes. The information may be disclosed to those involved in determining whether to grant the reasonable accommodation. Beyond those agency decision makers, however, there are strict limitations on those to whom the information may be provided.
What if a request for reasonable accommodation is denied?
If an agency denies a request for reasonable accommodation, it must inform the individual in writing of the denial and the specific reasons for it. The agency should also notify the individual that s/he has a right to file an EEO complaint and to engage in any informal dispute resolution procedures the agency makes available for this purpose.
What if the individual wants to challenge a denial of reasonable accommodation?
The Executive Order encourages agencies to use voluntary, informal dispute resolution processes to resolve disagreements resulting from the reasonable accommodation process. These informal processes must be in addition to -- and may not modify or replace -- the EEO complaint process.
Can the individual file an EEO complaint under the Rehabilitation Act?
The Executive Order does not create new rights for Executive branch employees or applicants. However, nothing in the Executive Order limits an individual's rights under the Rehabilitation Act. Where an individual believes that a denial of a reasonable accommodation, or an aspect of the reasonable accommodation process, has resulted in a violation of the Rehabilitation Act, therefore, s/he may file an EEO complaint through the process set forth in EEOC regulations at 29 C.F.R. Part 1614. The individual must initiate the EEO complaint process within 45 days of the date of the challenged action, whether or not s/he is engaged in an informal dispute resolution process at the same time.
Does the Executive Order impose reporting or recordkeeping requirements?
The Executive Order requires each agency to submit its procedures, and any modifications it later makes to those procedures, to the EEOC. The Order also requires each agency to track information that will enable the agency to evaluate its own performance in considering and granting requests for reasonable accommodation. The Order does not, however, impose any specific recordkeeping requirements.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov