Small Business Fact Sheet: Harassment in the Workplace | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Small Business Fact Sheet: Harassment in the Workplace
Small Business Fact Sheet: Harassment in the Workplace
When does harassing conduct in the workplace violate the law?
For harassment to violate the law, it must be based on a legally protected characteristic, among other requirements. The protected characteristics covered by the federal laws enforced by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) are: race, color, religion, national origin, sex (including sexual orientation;
transgender status
; and pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), disability, age (40 or older), and genetic information (including family medical history). Therefore, while some employees may experience unwelcome teasing, mistreatment, or rude behavior in the workplace, such conduct cannot violate the federal EEO laws unless it occurs because of a protected characteristic.
Does
all
harassing conduct that is linked to a protected characteristic violate the EEO laws?
No. To violate the EEO laws, the harassing conduct also must:
involve a change to employment (for example, the employee is fired, demoted, denied a promotion or transfer, reassigned, or receives reduced hours or pay because the employee rejected a supervisor’s sexual advances);
or
create a “hostile work environment.”
What is a “hostile work environment”?
A “hostile work environment” is created when harassing conduct that is based on a legally protected characteristic is so
severe
or
frequent
(courts use the word “pervasive”) that a reasonable person in the employee’s position would find the situation to be abusive.
What are some examples of harassing conduct that is based on legally protected characteristics?
saying or writing an ethnic, racial, or sex-based slur;
forwarding an offensive or derogatory “joke” email;
displaying offensive material (such as a noose, swastika or other hate symbols, or offensive cartoons, photographs, or graffiti);
threatening or intimidating a person because of the person’s religious beliefs or lack of religious beliefs;
sharing pornography or sexually demeaning depictions of people, including AI-generated and deepfake images and videos;
making comments based on stereotypes about older workers;
mimicking or mocking a person’s disability;
mocking a person’s accent;
making fun of a person’s religious garments or displays;
asking intrusive questions about a person’s sexual orientation,
transgender status
, gender transition, or intimate body parts;
groping, touching, or otherwise physically assaulting a person;
making sexualized gestures or comments, even when this behavior is
not
motivated by a desire to have sex; and
threatening a person’s job or offering preferential treatment in exchange for sexual favors.
Can only women be targets of sexual harassment?
No, anyone can be the target of sexual harassment. To violate the law, sexual harassment does not need to be based on sexual desire, and can result from behavior that is intended to embarrass, intimidate, or belittle a person because of their sex.
Do employers need to protect employees only from harassing conduct by owners, managers, and supervisors?
No. Workplace harassment because of a protected basis by
any
person, including coworkers, customers, and clients, can violate the federal EEO laws
.
Different liability standards apply depending on the harasser’s status or job in the employer’s organization. A discussion of the different liability standards (and defenses to liability) is beyond the scope of this document. For additional information, see
section IV of the Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace
.
What are an employer’s obligations with regard to harassment in the workplace?
Employers are responsible for preventing workplace harassment. Employers also are responsible for quickly ending harassing behavior once they learn about it, even if the harassment has not yet been severe enough or frequent enough to create a hostile work environment.
What are some steps employers can take to prevent harassment?
Employers are strongly
encouraged
to:
have a clear, easy-to-understand anti-harassment policy that is understood by its workforce;
have safe and effective procedures that employees can use to report potential harassment, including more than one option for reporting;
provide training to all employees, including supervisors and managers, about the company’s anti-harassment policy and complaint process; and
take steps to ensure the anti-harassment policy is followed consistently and the complaint process is working.
Employers should consider whether employees in their workforce experience barriers to comprehension, including limited ability to speak English, to read, or to understand the material, when the employers are creating, revising, or assessing the effectiveness of an anti-harassment policy, reporting procedures, or training.
What should an employer do in response to a harassment complaint?
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to responding to a harassment complaint. However, an effective response often involves two steps: (1) conducting an investigation; and (2) if needed, taking appropriate corrective action.
When responding to a report of potential harassment, employers should be mindful that federal EEO laws prohibit retaliation against the employee who made the report. For additional information about retaliation, please visit
https://www.eeoc.gov/retaliation
.
What should an employer consider when investigating a harassment complaint?
An employer should consider how to conduct a prompt, impartial, and thorough investigation to decide whether harassing conduct occurred and take appropriate action to promote a safe, fair, and productive work environment. What steps to take, what evidence to gather, and whom to interview will depend on the particular facts and circumstances of the allegations.
If an employer investigates a harassment complaint and determines that harassment did occur, is the employer required by law to fire the harasser?
No. If an employer determines that some type of consequence is appropriate, the employer will decide what corrective action should be taken under the circumstances. In deciding what is appropriate, it can be helpful to keep in mind that the goals are to stop the harassment now and prevent future harassment. There is a wide range of potential appropriate corrective actions. Examples include informal counseling, a written warning, mandatory harassment training, suspension without pay, reassignment, demotion to a non-supervisory position, and ultimately termination.
How can small businesses obtain additional information about harassment from the EEOC?
The EEOC has a number of resources for small businesses. When contacting EEOC, please ask for language interpretation assistance, if needed. EEOC’s small business resources include:
EEOC’s Small Business Resource Center:
https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business
Small Business Liaisons are available to answer questions about the laws enforced by the EEOC, including how to comply with those laws. EEOC’s Small Business Liaison directory is available at
https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business-liaisons
.
Outreach and Education Coordinators who are available to discuss EEOC’s outreach programs. EEOC’s Outreach and Education Coordinator directory is available at
https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc-outreach-program-coordinators
.
For more information on harassment, please visit:
Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace:
https://www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/enforcement-guidance-harassment-workplace
EEOC Harassment Home Page:
https://www.eeoc.gov/harassment
EEOC Sexual Harassment Home Page:
https://www.eeoc.gov/sexual-harassment
Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace: Summary of Key Provisions:
https://www.eeoc.gov/summary-key-provisions-eeoc-enforcement-guidance-harassment-workplace
Promising Practices for Preventing Harassment:
https://www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/promising-practices-preventing-harassment
Promising Practices for Preventing Harassment in the Federal Sector:
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/reports/promising-practices-preventing-harassment-federal-sector
EEOC’s Select Task Force on the Study of Harassment in the Workplace, Report of Co-Chairs Chai R. Feldblum & Victoria A. Lipnic,
https://www.eeoc.gov/select-task-force-study-harassment-workplace
(including recommendations, checklists, chart of risk factors for employers, and link to promising practices)
Enabled In-page Navigation
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov