Small Business Fact Sheet: Retaliation and Related Issues | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
Small Business Fact Sheet: Retaliation and Related Issues
Small Business Fact Sheet:  Retaliation and Related Issues
Issuing Authority
This technical assistance document was issued upon approval of the Chair of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-NVTA-2016-6
Concise Display Name
Small Business Fact Sheet:  Retaliation and Related Issues
Issue Date
08-26-2016
General Topics
Retaliation
Summary
This document concerns the prohibition against retaliation under EEOC-enforced laws, drafted in particular for the interests of small businesses
Citation
Title VII, EPA, ADA, GINA, 29 CFR Part 1601, 29 CFR Part 1620, 29 CFR Part 1621, 29 CFR Part 1625, 29 CFR Part 1626, 29 CFR Part 1630, 29 CFR Part 1635
Document Applicant
Small Business, Employees, Employers, Applicants, HR Practitioners
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
1. What is retaliation?
Federal equal employment opportunity (EEO) laws prohibit employers, employment agencies, or unions from punishing job applicants or employees for asserting their rights to be free from employment discrimination, including harassment.
Asserting EEO rights is called "protected activity."
Sometimes there is retaliation before any "protected activity" occurs. For example, an employment policy that discourages the exercise of EEO rights could itself be unlawful.
2. What actions by applicants and employees are protected from retaliation?
Protected actions can take many forms, ranging from
participating in an EEO complaint process to reasonably opposing discrimination
. For example, it is unlawful to retaliate against applicants or employees for:
taking part in an internal or external investigation of employment discrimination, including harassment;
filing or being a witness in a charge, complaint, or lawsuit alleging discrimination;
communicating with a supervisor or manager about employment discrimination, including harassment;
answering questions during an employer investigation of alleged harassment;
refusing to follow orders that would result in discrimination;
resisting sexual advances, or intervening to protect others;
reporting an instance of harassment to a supervisor;
requesting accommodation of a disability or for a religious practice; or
asking managers or co-workers about salary information to uncover potentially discriminatory wages.
Participating in a complaint process is protected from retaliation under all circumstances. Other acts to oppose discrimination are protected as long as the employee was acting on a reasonable belief that something in the workplace may violate
EEO laws, even if he or she did not use legal terminology to describe the issue.
The protections against retaliation apply not only to current employees (full-time, part-time, probationary, seasonal, and temporary), but also
to applicants and to former employees
.
For example, a supervisor cannot refuse to hire an applicant because of his EEO complaint against a prior employer, or give a false negative job reference to punish a former employee for making an EEO complaint.
These protections also apply regardless of an applicant or employee's
citizenship or work authorization status.
For example, assume an employer suspects a worker is undocumented but does not attempt to verify her authorization to work as required by the immigration laws. If the worker raises an EEO complaint, such as sexual harassment or national origin
discrimination, and the employer then threatens to expose the worker's immigration status as punishment for complaining about EEO violations, the employer would violate the ban on retaliation.
3. Does this mean that an employer can't ever punish someone who has engaged in EEO activity?
No. Engaging in EEO activity does not shield an employee from discipline or discharge. Employers are free to discipline or terminate workers if motivated by
non-retaliatory and non-discriminatory
reasons that would otherwise result in
such consequences.
Examples include poor job performance or low productivity, or where the employee's actions in opposing discrimination interfered with job performance or involved something illegal or disruptive to the workplace.
If a manager recommends an adverse action in the wake of an employee's discrimination complaint or other protected activity, some employers have found it useful to evaluate whether the adverse action is appropriate and ensure it is not motivated
by retaliation.
4. What if the employer never takes an official employment action against the employee? Could there still be retaliation?
Yes. An employer is not allowed to do anything in response to EEO activity that would discourage someone from resisting or complaining about future discrimination.
For example, depending on the facts of the particular case, it could be retaliation because of the employee's EEO activity for an employer to:
reprimand an employee or give a performance evaluation that is lower than it should be;
transfer the employee to a less desirable position;
engage in verbal or physical abuse;
threaten to make, or actually make reports to authorities (such as reporting immigration status or contacting the police);
increase scrutiny;
spread false rumors, treat a family member negatively (for example, cancel a contract with the person's spouse); or
take action that makes the person's work more difficult (for example, punishing an employee for an EEO complaint by purposefully changing his work schedule to conflict with family responsibilities).
5. What does the law say about interference with ADA rights?
The ADA prohibits disability discrimination, limits an employer's ability to ask for medical information, requires confidentiality of medical information, and gives employees who have disabilities the right to reasonable accommodations at work
absent undue hardship. (For more information on the ADA, you can visit
http://eeoc.gov/laws/types/disability.cfm
.)
An employer cannot retaliate against an employee for raising ADA rights, and also cannot interfere with ADA rights by doing anything that makes it more difficult for an applicant or employee to assert any of these rights.
For example, it is unlawful for an employer to use threats to discourage someone from asking for, or keeping, a reasonable accommodation; intimidate an employee into undergoing an unlawful medical examination; or pressure an employee not to file
a disability discrimination complaint. This is unlawful even if the person goes on to exercise his ADA rights.
6. Can employers do anything to reduce their chances of violating the law?
Yes. The following practices are not all legally required, but may reduce the chances of retaliation:
Education
: Supervisors and managers may not know that certain acts are considered illegal retaliation or interference. An employer can educate its workforce by having a written, plain-language policy, and by training all of its employees
to identify and stop retaliation and interference. Employees may benefit from instruction on how to handle tough situations where retaliation or interference is likely to occur.
Documentation and review of employment actions
: Managers and supervisors may be more aware of actions that can be viewed as retaliatory if they are required to justify negative employment actions in writing. Other supervisors could be
asked to review these negative actions to ensure that they are justified and consistent with existing practice.
Support
: Employees who are accused of employment discrimination, harassment, or interference may benefit from ongoing, individual support. The employer can discuss its policies and provide tips for avoiding actual or perceived retaliation
and interference.
7. How can a job applicant or employee report retaliation or interference?
An applicant or employee who believes his rights under federal EEO laws have been violated may file a complaint:
Private sector and state/local government employees
may file a charge of discrimination by contacting the EEOC at 1-800-669-4000 or go to
https://www.eeoc.gov/employees/howtofile.cfm
.
Federal government employees
may initiate the complaint process by contacting an EEO counselor at your agency; more information is available at
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/fed_employees/complaint_overview.cfm
.
More Information
For more information on retaliation, see the EEOC publication
Questions and Answers: Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues
,
https://www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/retaliation-qa.cfm
.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is the federal agency that enforces laws against employment discrimination, harassment and retaliation. More information:
visit
https://www.eeoc.gov/
, call
the EEOC at 800-669-4000 (voice) or 800-669-6820 (TTY), or visit your local EEOC office (
https://www.eeoc.gov/field/index.cfm
). Ask for translation assistance if needed.
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov