The Family and Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 | U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Menu
Header Navigation
Online Filing
Public Portal
Attorney E-file
Locations
Operating Status
Languages
English
Español (Spanish)
Resources in Other Languages
عربي (Arabic)
简体中文 (Chinese, Simplified)
繁體中文 - Chinese (Traditional)
Kreyòl Ayisyen (Haitian Creole)
한국어 (Korean)
Русском (Russian)
Português (Portuguese)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
ไทย (Thai)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
فارسی (Persian. Farsi)
پښتو (Pashto)
Toggle Search Form
Any of these words
(optional)
Search
About EEOC
About EEOC
Overview
The Commission and The General Counsel
Meetings of the Commission
Commission Votes
EEOC History
News and Information
Newsroom
What You Should Know
Legislative Affairs
Publications
Outreach and Education
FOIA
Laws and Enforcement
EEOC Legal Resources
Mediation
Litigation
Systemic Enforcement
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Programs and Performance
Budget and Performance
Initiatives
Interagency Programs
State and Local Programs
Task Forces
Tribal Programs
Data and Analytics
Overview
Data Governance
EEO Data Collections
Data and Statistics
Data Tools and Products
No FEAR Act Data
Inside EEOC
Careers
Office for Civil Rights
Doing Business with EEOC
AI Governance
Privacy
Office of Inspector General
Employees & Job Applicants
Employees & Applicants
Overview
Coverage
Timeliness
Prohibited Practices
Filing a Charge of Discrimination
Filing a Charge
How to File
After You File a Charge
Confidentiality
Mediation
Remedies
Existing Charges
Filing a Lawsuit
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin Discrimination
Pregnancy Discrimination
Race/Color Discrimination
Religious Discrimination
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Employers / Small Business
Employers / Small Business
Overview
Coverage
After a Charge is Filed
Resolving a Charge
Commissioner Charges
Directed Investigations
Remedies
Small Business Resource Center
Small Business Home
Small Business Requirements
Frequently Asked Questions
Tips for Small Businesses
Making an Employment Decision?
EEOC Resources
Small Business Assistance
Small Business Fact Sheet
Small Business Videos
EEOC Glossary
Contact Us
Discrimination by Type
Age
Disability
Equal Pay
Genetic Information
Harassment
National Origin
Pregnancy
Race/Color
Religion
Retaliation
Sex
Sexual Harassment
Prohibited Practices
Recordkeeping
EEO Data Collections
"Know Your Rights" Poster
Training
Other Employment Issues
Federal Sector
Federal Agencies
Overview
Federal EEO Coordination
Federal Agency EEO Directors
EEOC Legal Resources
Management Directives & Federal Sector Guidance
Federal Training & Outreach
Resources
Federal Employees & Job Applicants
Overview
Federal Complaint Process
Federal Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution
Prohibited Practices
Resources
Contact Us
Contact EEOC
Find Your Nearest Office
Office Operating Status
How to File a Charge
Public Portal
Home
Laws
guidance
The Family and Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
The Family and Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
Issuing Authority
This technical assistance document was issued upon approval of the Chair of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
OLC Control Number
EEOC-NVTA-1995-2
Concise Display Name
The Family and Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
Issue Date
11-01-1995
General Topics
Sex, Disability, Accommodations, Leave
Summary
This document addresses common questions about Title VII and the ADA in situations where the FMLA also applies.
Citation
Title VII, ADA, 29 CFR Part 1630
Document Applicant
Employees, Employers, Applicants, HR Practitioners
Previous Revision
No
Disclaimer
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
Notice Concerning The Americans With Disabilities Act Amendments Act Of 2008
This document was issued prior to enactment of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA), which took effect on January 1, 2009.  The ADAAA broadened the statutory definition of disability, as summarized in this
list of specific changes.
The Family and Medical Leave Act,
the Americans with Disabilities Act, and
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
This fact sheet was prepared by the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission's (EEOC) Office of Legal Counsel.  It is intended to
provide technical assistance on some common questions that have
arisen about the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA)
and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII) when
the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) also applies.
Introduction
Background
1.   Q:     What is the relationship between requirements of the
FMLA,1 the ADA,2 and Title VII3?
A:     The FMLA and the ADA both require a covered employer
to grant medical leave to an employee in certain
circumstances.4  The FMLA and Title VII both have
requirements governing leave for pregnancy and
pregnancy-related conditions.
In addition, under Title VII, employers must not
discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin when they provide family or
medical leave.
2.   Q:     Who enforces the FMLA?
A:     The Department of Labor enforces the FMLA.  The EEOC
has no enforcement responsibility for the FMLA.
3.   Q:     When did the FMLA go into effect?
A:     The FMLA went into effect on August 5, 1993.5  The
FMLA final rule became effective on April 6, 1995.6
Basic FMLA Requirements
4.   Q:     What leave is an employee entitled to under the FMLA?
A:     Under the FMLA, an "eligible"7 employee may take up
to 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period
for one or more of the following reasons:
(1)     The birth of a child, and to care for the
newborn child;
(2)     The placement of a child with the employee
through adoption or foster care, and to care
for the child;8
(3)     To care for the employee's spouse, son,
daughter, or parent with a serious health
condition; and
(4)     Because a serious health condition makes the
employee unable to perform one or more of the
essential functions of his or her job.9
5.   Q:     What other rights do "eligible" employees have in
conjunction with FMLA leave?
A:     During FMLA leave, an employer must maintain the
employee's existing level of coverage under a group
health plan.10  At the end of FMLA leave, an employer
must take an employee back into the same or an
equivalent job.11
When FMLA, ADA and Title VII Coverage Overlap
6.   Q:     What employers are covered by the FMLA, the ADA and
Title VII?
A:     The FMLA covers private employers with 50 or more
employees.12  The ADA and Title VII cover private
employers with 15 or more employees.13  Thus, only
those private employers with 50 or more employees are
covered concurrently by the FMLA, the ADA and Title
VII.14
State and local government employers are covered by
the ADA and the FMLA, regardless of the number of
employees.15  State and local government employers
are covered by Title VII, however, only if they have
15 or more employees.16
7.   Q:     Are all employees who are protected by Title VII or
the ADA also entitled to leave under the FMLA?
A:     No.  Employees protected by Title VII or the ADA must
be independently "eligible" for FMLA leave.
"Eligibility" for FMLA leave depends on several
factors, for example, length of service.17  In
addition, an individual must be employed by an FMLA-
covered employer with 50 or more employees to obtain
FMLA leave.  See Question 6.
The ADA and the FMLA
FMLA "serious health condition" and ADA "disability"
8.   Q:     What is a "serious health condition" under the FMLA?
A:     An FMLA "serious health condition" is "an illness,
injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition
that involves . . . [i]npatient care . . . or
[c]ontinuing treatment by a health care provider."18
9.   Q:     Is an FMLA "serious health condition" the same as an
ADA "disability"?
A:     No.  An FMLA "serious health condition" is not
necessarily an ADA "disability."  An ADA "disability"
is an impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities, a record of such an
impairment, or being regarded as having such an
impairment.
Some FMLA "serious health conditions" may be ADA
disabilities, for example, most cancers and serious
strokes.  Other "serious health conditions" may not
be ADA disabilities, for example, pregnancy or a
routine broken leg or hernia.  This is because the
condition is not an impairment (e.g., pregnancy), or
because the impairment is not substantially limiting
(e.g., a routine broken leg or hernia).
In addition, the fact that an individual has a record
of a "serious health condition" does not necessarily
mean that s/he has a record of an ADA disability.
Under the ADA, an individual must have a record of a
substantially limiting impairment in order to be
covered.
Finally, just because someone has a "serious health
condition" also does not mean that the employer
regards him/her as having an ADA disability.  To
satisfy this prong of the ADA definition of
"disability," the employer must treat the individual
as having an impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities.19
To determine if an individual has an ADA disability,
all pertinent evidence, including any information
about whether the individual has or had a "serious
health condition," should be considered.  Under the
FMLA regulations, employers must allow EEOC
investigators to review pertinent FMLA medical
certifications and recertifications, and other
relevant materials, upon request.20
Medical Certifications, Inquiries and Confidentiality
10.  Q:     Is there a conflict between the FMLA provision
allowing employers to ask for certification that an
employee has a serious health condition and ADA
restrictions on disability-related inquiries of
employees?
A:     No.  When an employee requests leave under the FMLA
for a serious health condition, employers will not
violate the ADA by asking for the information
specified in the FMLA certification form.  The FMLA
form only requests information relating to the
particular serious health condition, as defined in
the FMLA, for which the employee is seeking leave.
An employer is entitled to know why an employee, who
otherwise should be at work, is requesting time off
under the FMLA.  If the inquiries are strictly
limited in this fashion, they would be "job-related
and consistent with business necessity" under the
ADA.21
11.  Q:     May an employer keep a single confidential medical
file for each employee, separate from the usual
personnel file, for medical documentation under both
the ADA and the FMLA?
A:     Yes.  An employer may keep a single confidential
medical file, separate from the usual personnel file,
containing both FMLA and ADA medical information if
the employer follows the ADA confidentiality
standards.  This includes following the ADA
interpretations of those confidentiality exceptions
that are set forth in both the ADA and the FMLA
regulations.22  For example, employers may not give
supervisors and managers unlimited access to the
medical files.  However, employers may give
supervisors and managers information concerning
necessary work restrictions and accommodations.23
Comparison of ADA and FMLA Leave
12.  Q:     Does the FMLA's limit of 12 workweeks of leave in a
12- month period mean that the ADA also limits
employees to 12 weeks of leave per year?
A:     No.  The FMLA does not mean that more than 12 weeks
of unpaid leave automatically imposes an undue
hardship for purposes of the ADA.  An otherwise
qualified individual with a disability is entitled to
more than 12 weeks of unpaid leave as a reasonable
accommodation if the additional leave would not
impose an undue hardship on the operation of the
employer's business.  To evaluate whether additional
leave would impose an undue hardship, the employer
may consider the impact on its operations caused by
the employee's initial 12-week absence, along with
the undue hardship factors specified in the ADA.  See
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(p).
13.  Q:     How do the ADA and the FMLA requirements compare
regarding intermittent or occasional leave?
A:     Under the ADA, a qualified individual with a
disability may work part-time in his/her current
position, or occasionally take time off, as a
reasonable accommodation if it would not impose an
undue hardship on the employer.  If (or when) reduced
hours create an undue hardship in the current
position, the employer must see if there is a vacant,
equivalent position for which the employee is
qualified and to which the employee can be reassigned
without undue hardship while working a reduced
schedule.  If an equivalent position is not
available, the employer must look for a vacant
position at a lower level for which the employee is
qualified.  Continued accommodation is not required
if a vacant position at a lower level is also
unavailable.24
The ADA does not prohibit an employer and an employee
from agreeing on another mutually acceptable
accommodation.  For example, an employer and employee
may agree to a transfer, on either a temporary or a
permanent basis, if both parties believe that such a
transfer is preferable to accommodating the employee
in his/her current position.
Under the FMLA, an "eligible" employee may take leave
intermittently or on a part-time basis25 for his or
her own "serious health condition" when medically
necessary for treatment or recovery, until s/he has
used up the equivalent of 12 workweeks in a 12-month
period.26  When such leave is foreseeable based on
planned medical treatment, an employer may require
the employee to temporarily transfer (for the
duration of the leave) to an available alternative
position for which the employee is qualified and
which better suits his/her reduced hours.27
14.  Q:     What are employees' reinstatement rights under the
ADA and the FMLA?
A:     Under the ADA, the employee is entitled to return to
the same job unless the employer demonstrates that
holding the job open would impose an undue hardship.
In some instances, an employee may request more leave under
the ADA even after the employer has communicated that it
cannot hold the employee's job open any longer (i.e., there
is undue hardship).  In this situation, the ADA-covered
employer must see if it has a vacant, equivalent position
for which the employee is qualified and to which the
employee can be reassigned without undue hardship to
continue his/her leave.  If an equivalent position is not
available, the employer must look for a vacant position at
a lower level.  Continued accommodation is not required if
a vacant position at a lower level is also unavailable.28
In other instances, an employer may hold the original
position open, and the employee may want to return to work,
but may be unable to perform an essential function of the
original position even with reasonable accommodation.
Under the ADA, the employer must then consider
reassignment, first to a vacant equivalent position for
which the individual is qualified and, if one is
unavailable, to a vacant position at a lower level.
Further accommodation is not required if a vacant position
at a lower level is also unavailable.
Under the FMLA, an employee is entitled to return to the
same position or to an equivalent position.29  However, if
an employee is unable to perform an essential function of
the same or equivalent position because of a physical or
mental condition, the FMLA does not require the employer to
reinstate the employee into another job.30
15.  Q:     Do the ADA and the FMLA require an employer to continue an
employee's health insurance coverage during medical leave?
A:     Under the ADA, an employer must continue health insurance
coverage for an employee taking leave or working part- time
only if the employer also provides coverage for other
employees in the same leave or part-time status.  The
coverage must be on the same terms normally provided to
those in the same leave or part-time status.
Under the FMLA, an employer always must maintain the
employee's existing level of coverage (including family or
dependent coverage) under a group health plan during the
period of FMLA leave, provided the employee pays his or her
share of the premiums.31  An employer may not discriminate
against an employee using FMLA leave, and therefore must
also provide such an employee with the same benefits (e.g.,
life or disability insurance) normally provided to an
employee in the same leave or part-time status.32
ADA Compliance When the FMLA Also Applies
16.  Q:     If an individual requests time off for medical treatment,
should the employer treat this as a request for FMLA leave
and ADA reasonable accommodation?
A:     If an employee requests time off for a reason related or
possibly related to a disability (e.g., "I need six weeks
off to get treatment for a back problem"), the employer
should consider this a request for ADA reasonable
accommodation as well as FMLA leave.  The employer may
require FMLA certification33 and may make additional
disability-related inquiries if necessary to decide whether
the employee is entitled to reasonable accommodation
because s/he also has a covered disability.  However, if
the employee states that s/he only wants to invoke rights
under the FMLA, the employer should not make additional
inquiries related to ADA coverage.
17.  Q:     When both the ADA and the FMLA apply, how should the
employer determine which terms and conditions govern the
employee's initial 12 weeks of medical leave?
A:     Under the FMLA rule, an employer must provide leave under
whichever statutory provision provides the greater rights
to employees.34  For examples of how this principle is
applied, see the FMLA rule at §§ 825.702(b)-(e).
18.  Q:     As an alternative to a leave of absence, may an employer
offer an effective reasonable accommodation that will
enable an employee to continue working?
A:     An employer may offer an employee a reasonable
accommodation other than the leave s/he requested under the
ADA, as long as it is effective.35  For example, an
employer may offer an assistive device, an opportunity to
work reduced hours in the employee's current job, or a
temporary assignment to another job, if these are effective
accommodations.
However, if the individual is "eligible" for leave under
the FMLA and has a serious health condition that prevents
him/her from performing an essential job function, s/he has
the right to take a leave of absence of up to 12 workweeks
in 12 months, even if s/he could continue working with an
effective reasonable accommodation.36  While the FMLA does
not prevent an employee from accepting an alternative to
leave, the acceptance must be voluntary and uncoerced.37
The ADA and Family Leave
19.  Q:     Does the ADA require an employer to give an employee
time off to care for a spouse, son, daughter, parent or
other individual with a disability?
A:     The ADA's reasonable accommodation obligation does not
require a covered employer to give an employee time off to
care for a spouse, son, daughter, parent or other
individual with a disability with whom the employee has a
relationship.38  However, an employer would be required to
provide leave on the same terms as it normally provides
leave to employees who need to care for someone who is
ill.39
Title VII and the FMLA
Leave for Pregnancy, Childbirth and Related Conditions
20.  Q:     Under Title VII, what rights do women have to take leave
for pregnancy, childbirth and related conditions?
A:     If an employer offers temporary or short-term disability
leave, Title VII requires the employer to treat pregnancy
and related conditions the same as non-pregnancy
conditions.40
For example, if an employer provides up to 8 weeks paid
leave for temporary medical conditions, the employer must
provide up to 8 weeks paid leave for pregnancy or related
conditions.
21.  Q:     Can a leave policy that complies with the FMLA violate
Title VII?
A:     Yes.  An employee is protected by anti-discrimination laws
such as Title VII regardless of how long s/he has been on
the job, but an employee is not eligible for FMLA leave
until s/he has been employed for 12 months.  Thus, an
employer policy that denies pregnancy leave during the
first year of employment, but provides leave for other
medical conditions, would discriminate against pregnant
women in violation of Title VII.  Additionally, a neutral
policy that prohibits any employee from taking sick leave
or short-term disability leave during the first year of
employment could have a disparate impact on women and thus
violate Title VII.
Title VII and Family Leave
22.  Q:     Does Title VII require covered employers to give employees
leave to care for an ill child or family member?
A:     Title VII in itself does not require employers to give
employees leave to care for an ill child or family member.
However, Title VII prohibits covered employers from
discriminating on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
or national origin when they administer family leave.
For example, if an employer allowed a woman but not a man
to take 12 weeks of leave to care for a newly-adopted or
placed child, the man would have a Title VII cause of
action because the employer administered family leave in a
discriminatory way based on gender.
As another example, if an employer allowed a woman to take
3 weeks of childcare leave in addition to leave necessary
to recuperate from childbirth, but declined to permit a man
to take 3 weeks of childcare leave, the man would have a
Title VII cause of action because the employer administered
family leave in a discriminatory way based on gender.
Referral of Individuals with FMLA Questions or Complaints
23.  Q:     Who should be contacted for information about the FMLA or
to file FMLA complaints?
A:     For additional information about the FMLA, or to file an
FMLA complaint, individuals should contact the nearest
office of the Wage and Hour Division, Employment Standards
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor.  The Wage and
Hour Division is listed in most telephone directories under
U.S. Government, Department of Labor.
For further information, contact the Office of Legal Counsel's
Attorney of the Day at (202) 921-2539.
This fact sheet is available upon request in alternative formats.
Write or call EEOC's Office of Communications and Legislative Affairs,
1801 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20507, (202) 663- 4900,
TDD (202) 663-4494.
The purpose of this fact sheet is to provide technical assistance to
individuals interested in the relationship between the ADA, Title VII,
and the FMLA.  It is not a formal Commission policy document.
1.     0     References to the FMLA are to Titles I and IV of the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.
2.     0     References to the ADA are to Title I of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
3.     0     References to Title VII are to Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, as amended.
4.     0     Under the ADA, unpaid medical leave is a reasonable
accommodation and must be provided to an otherwise qualified
individual with a disability unless (or until) it imposes an undue
hardship on the operation of the employer's business.  See
29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. § 1630.2(o).  No set amount of leave is
required as a reasonable accommodation under the ADA.
5.     0     If a collective bargaining agreement was in effect on
August 5, 1993, the FMLA did not become effective for employees
covered by the agreement until February 5, 1994, or the date the
agreement expired, whichever was earlier.  29 C.F.R. § 825.102(a).
6.     0     29 C.F.R. Part 825, published at 60 Fed. Reg. 2180
(January 6, 1995), as amended at 60 Fed. Reg. 6658 (February 3, 1995)
and 60 Fed. Reg. 16382 (March 30, 1995).
While the text of this document stands on its own, FMLA
regulatory citations are provided in footnotes for those readers who
need to obtain a more detailed understanding of certain FMLA
provisions.
7.     0     See footnote 17 below for the FMLA definition of
"eligible" employee.
8.     0     Leave for (1) and (2) above must be concluded within 12
months of the birth or placement, unless state law or the employer
allows a longer leave period.  29 C.F.R. § 825.201.
9.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.200(a).  For purposes of this provision,
the FMLA rule incorporates by reference the ADA definition of
"essential functions."  Id. at § 825.115.  See question 8 for a
discussion of "serious health condition."
10.     0     Id. at § 825.209.
11.     0     Id. at § 825.214.
12.     0     Id. at § 825.104.
13.     0     42 U.S.C. § 12111(5)(A)(ADA); 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(b)(Title
VII).
14.     0     Note that the FMLA has special requirements for public
and private elementary and secondary schools, due to the unique nature
of education.  For purposes of coverage, public and private elementary
and secondary schools are covered by the FMLA regardless of the number
of employees.  29 C.F.R. §§ 825.104(a), 825.600.  Thus, any elementary
or secondary school covered by the ADA and Title VII is also covered
by the FMLA.
15.     0     29 C.F.R. §§ 825.104(a), 825.108 (FMLA);
28 C.F.R. § 35.140 (ADA Title II covers all public employers without
regard to the number of employees, and ADA Title I standards apply by
incorporation);  29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(e)(ADA Title I applies to all
employers with 15 or more employees, including state and local
governments).
16.     0     42 U.S.C. § 2000e(b)(definition of "employer").
17.     0     Employees are "eligible" for FMLA leave if they:  (1)
have been employed by a "covered" employer for at least 12 months,
which need not be consecutive; (2) had at least 1,250 hours of service
during the 12-month period immediately before the leave started; and
(3) are employed at a worksite where the employer employs 50 or more
employees within 75 miles.  29 C.F.R. § 825.110.
An "eligible" employee must meet additional FMLA requirements in
order to take medical leave because of his/her own "serious health
condition."  A health care provider must find that the employee is
unable to work at all, or is unable to perform any one of the
essential functions of his/her job, due to the "serious health
condition."  29 C.F.R. §§ 825.115, 825.200(a)(4).  The FMLA rule
incorporates the ADA definition of "essential functions" here.  Id.
at § 825.115.
18.     0     29 C.F.R. §§ 825.114(a)(1),(2).  The FMLA regulations
explain that "inpatient care" means at least an overnight stay at a
health care facility, and includes any related period of incapacity
or subsequent treatment relating back to the inpatient care.  Id. at
§ 825.114(a)(1).  "Continuing treatment by a health care provider"
covers five situations: (1) incapacity of more than three consecutive
calendar days that involves either (a) treatment two or more times by
a health care provider (or under the direction or orders of a health
care provider), or (b) treatment by a health care provider on at least
one occasion resulting in a regimen of continuing treatment under the
supervision of the health care provider; (2) any period of incapacity
due to pregnancy, or for prenatal care; (3) any period of incapacity
or treatment due to a chronic serious health condition requiring
periodic visits for treatment, including episodic conditions such as
asthma, diabetes, and epilepsy; (4) a period of incapacity which is
permanent or long-term due to a condition for which treatment may not
be effective, although the individual is under the continuing
supervision of a health care provider  (e.g., Alzheimer's, severe
stroke, or the terminal stages of a disease); and (5) any period of
absence to receive multiple treatments from a health care provider
(or on orders or referral from a health care provider) for restorative
surgery or for a condition that would likely result in an absence of
more than three consecutive calendar days without treatment (e.g.,
cancer (chemotherapy, radiation), severe arthritis (physical therapy),
kidney disease (dialysis)).  Id. at § 825.114 (a)(2).
19.     0     For a detailed discussion of the ADA definition of
disability, see Compliance Manual Section 902, Definition of the Term
"Disability."
20.     0     See 29 C.F.R. § 825.500(g)(3).
21.     0     See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(c)(ADA).
22.     0     There is also an exception to the applicable
confidentiality requirements for government officials investigating
compliance with the FMLA, pursuant to § 825.500(g)(3) of the FMLA
regulations.
23.     0     29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(c)(1) (ADA); 29 C.F.R. § 825.500(g)
(FMLA).  See generally "ADA Enforcement Guidance:  Preemployment
Disability-Related Questions and Medical Examinations" at 21-23
(discussion of confidentiality)(October 10, 1995).
24.     0     42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B)(reassignment to a vacant
position is a reasonable accommodation); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii)
(same); "A Technical Assistance Manual on the Employment Provisions
(Title I) of the Americans with Disabilities Act," at III-24 to III-25
(discussing reassignment to a vacant position).
25.     0     "Intermittent leave" is FMLA leave taken in separate
blocks of time due to a single reason, for example pregnancy, when
leave may be used intermittently for prenatal care examinations or
episodes of severe morning sickness.  FMLA leave also may be used to
change an employee's schedule for a period of time, normally from
full-time to part-time.  29 C.F.R. § 825.203.
26.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.203(c).
27.     0     Id. at § 825.204(a); see also special rules governing
intermittent leave for instructional employees at §§ 825.601, 825.602
(accounting for factors such as the importance of teacher continuity
and summer vacations).
Note that a qualified individual with a disability who is using
FMLA leave to work reduced hours, and/or has been temporarily
transferred into another job under the FMLA, may also need a
reasonable accommodation (e.g., special equipment) to perform an
essential function of the job.  See 29 C.F.R. § 825.204(b).
28.     0     See supra note 24 (reassignment as a reasonable
accommodation).
29.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.214.  As an exception to the FMLA's
general guarantee of reinstatement, an employer may deny reinstatement
(but may not deny leave) to a "key" employee if restoration would
cause "substantial and grievous economic injury," provided certain
conditions are met.  29 C.F.R. § 825.216(c).  A "key" employee is "a
salaried FMLA-eligible employee who is among the highest paid 10
percent of all the employees employed by the employer within 75 miles
of the employee's worksite."  Id. at § 825.217.  The FMLA's
"substantial and grievous economic injury" standard is different from
and more stringent than the "undue hardship" test under the ADA.
Id. at  § 825.218(d).
30.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.214(b).
31.     0     Id. at §§ 825.209, 825.210.
32.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.220(c).
33.     0     For a discussion of when an employee must provide
medical certification to support FMLA leave, see 29 C.F.R. § 825.305.
34.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.702(a).
35.     0     29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. § 1630.9.
36.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.702(d)(1).
37.     0     29 C.F.R. § 825.220(d).
38.     0     The FMLA, in contrast, requires an employer to grant
leave to an eligible employee to care for the employee's spouse, son,
daughter, or parent with a serious health condition.
29 C.F.R. § 825.112(a)(3).  The FMLA rule defines "spouse," "son,"
"daughter," and "parent" at 29 C.F.R. § 825.113.
39.     0     29 C.F.R. § 1630.8 (relationship or association with an
individual with a disability).
40.     0     See 29 C.F.R. § 1604.10(b).  See generally 29 C.F.R.
pt. 1604 app. (Questions and Answers on the Pregnancy Discrimination
Act).
Return to top
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
EEOC Headquarters
131 M Street, NE
Washington, DC 20507
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
Questions?
Call 1-800-669-4000
For Deaf/Hard of Hearing callers:
1-800-669-6820
(TTY)
1-844-234-5122
(ASL Video Phone)
info@eeoc.gov
Find your nearest EEOC office
Connect With Us
FOIA
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Office of Inspector General
USA.gov